Icici Bank Ltd. vs Late Smt. Shakuntla Gupta (Since ... on 12 August, 2015 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/157278563/?type=print)
citeturn84search0 [wordlim: 200] Published: 11.2 years ago; Crawled: 2 days ago; (2) Notice of every such meeting as is referred to in sub- section (1) shall be given to every shareholder of each of the banking companies concerned in accordance with the relevant articles of association indicating the time, place and object of the meeting, and shall also be published atleast once a week for three consecutive weeks in not less than two newspapers which circulate in the locality or localities where the registered offices of the banking companies concerned are situated, one of such newspapers being in a language commonly understood in the locality or localities. ... In Singer's case (supra) it was held that the result of amalgamation of M/s.Singer Sewing Machine Company, incorporated under the laws of the State of New Jersey into Indian Sewing Machine Company, a company incorporated under the laws in India, was the assignment of its lease-hold premises. ... Telesound, the transferor company, was a tenant of a commercial premises in South Extension, Part I, New Delhi and the landlord was one M.L.Sondhi.
17. Telesound, the transferor company, was a tenant of a commercial premises in South Extension, Part I, New Delhi and the landlord was one M.L.Sondhi. Dalmia Cement Bharat Ltd. was the transferee company and under the scheme of amalgamation of the transferor company with the transferee company, all the assets and liabilities were to be RFA (OS) No.43/2015 Page 11 of 19 transferred. The scheme envisaged the number of shares to be given to the members of the transferor company by the transferee company. The landlord Sh.M.L.Sondhi filed objections to the scheme and claimed locus on the plea that since as a result of amalgamation the premises given on rent by him to the transferor company would be assigned to the transferee company and for which he had given no consent, the transfer would be illegal. Pointing out to the Court that the premises were protected under the applicable Rent Control Law which contained a provision empowering a landlord to evict the tenant if the tenant transferred, parted with possession or assigned, without the consent of the landlord, the tenanted premises, he opposed the scheme. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Singer India Limited vs Chander Mohan Chadha & Ors on 13 August, 2004 (https://indiankanoon.org/docfragment/1134266/?formInput=section+14++++++filter%3A++++++delhi+rent+control+act)
citeturn84search1 [wordlim: 200] Published: 22.2 years ago; Crawled: 3 months ago; Reference in this connection has been made to a decision of Delhi High Court in Telesound India Ltd. ... Renu Gautam and others 2004(4) SCC 794 wherein with reference to creation of partnership by a tenant it was held that if the user and control of the tenancy premises has been parted with and a deed of partnership has been drawn up as an indirect method of collecting the consideration for creation of sub-tenancy or for providing a cloak or cover to conceal a transaction not permitted by law, the court is not estopped from tearing the veil of partnership and finding out the real nature of transaction entered into between the tenant and the alleged sub-tenant. ... Learned counsel has further submitted that as the Company Petition for sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation was filed in order to secure compliance with law, namely, to reduce the equity capital of the American Company to 40 per cent and as the "lease, rights of tenancy or occupancy" of the said company got vested with the Indian Company in view of the sanction granted by the Bombay High Court i.e. under the orders of the Court, the principle laid down by this Court in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd and another vs.
(b) of the Act would not be attracted. Learned counsel has further submitted that in the peculiar facts of the present case, Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act should not be literally construed but a purposive construction should be given. Reference in this connection has been made to a decision of Delhi High Court in Telesound India Ltd. In re. 1983 (53) Company Cases 926 wherein it has been held that the effect of an order of amalgamation passed under Section 394 of the Companies Act is that the rights, properties and the liabilities of the transferor company become the rights, property and liabilities of the transferee-company and it is neither an assignment of right or property nor an assignment of the property by the company. On amalgamation, the transferor-company merges into the transferee-company shedding its corporate shell, but for all practical purposes remaining alive and thriving as part of the larger whole. The transferor-company is dissolved not because it has died or ceased to exist, but because for all practical purposes it has merged into another corporate shell. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M/S Bombay Finishing Works vs Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. on 1 February, 2019 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/84858276/)
citeturn84search2 [wordlim: 200] Published: 7.7 years ago; Crawled: 3 months ago; ## M/S Bombay Finishing Works vs Oriental Insurance Co. ...           at Oriental House, A-25/27, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi through ... Since, the surveyor found the amalgamated material stocks of N.V.
    1.    The Oriental Insurance Company Limited with its Head Office
          at Oriental House, A-25/27, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi through
          its Director/Manager.
    2.    The Oriental Insurance Company Limited, near Satkar Palace
          Amritsar Road, District Tarn Taran, through its Manager.
    3.    Senior Branch Manager, The Oriental Insurance Company
          Limited, Head Office at Oriental House, A-25/27, Asaf Ali
          Road, New Delhi.
                                                       .....Opposite Parties
                                 Complaint U/s 17(1)(a) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (as amended up to
                                 date).
    Quorum:-
         Shri J. S. Klar, Presiding Judicial Member.
    

Shri Rajinder Kumar Goyal, Member.

Present:-

> For the complainants : Sh. A.P.S. Sandhu, Advocate For the opposite parties : Sh. J.P. Nahar, Advocate .................................................................................. J. S. KLAR, PRESIDING JUDICIAL MEMBER:-
7. From appraisal of report of SA Investigating and Consulting Agency Ex.OP-1/2 and the report of the surveyor M/s Duggal Gupta Insurance Surveyors & Loss Assessors Pvt. Ltd. Ex.OP-1/4 and entire documents placed on the record by Consumer Complaint No.836 of 2017 13 complainant, we have found that complainant concern is the insured in standard fire and special fire peril policy for the period 21.09.2014 to 20.09.2015 and the sum assured for the building was Rs.30 lakh, for plant and machinery the sum assured was Rs.30 lakh and for stocks the sum assured was Rs.One Crore. Since, the surveyor found the amalgamated material stocks of N.V. Aggarwal Textile Mills, M/s Kamal Udyog and M/s Kamal Textile Mills stocked in the premises of the complainant factory, hence the OPs repudiated the insurance claim of complainant primarily on the ground that the stock statement of complainant etc. cannot be segregated from them as they were intermingled inextricably with the same. The stocks of Kamal Udyog and Kamal Textile Mills could not be considered, because these firm did not deal with the insured. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subhash Chand Goel & Ors vs Hans Raj Gupta & Co Pvt Ltd on 2 September, 2019 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/197892008/)
citeturn84search3 [wordlim: 200] Published: 7.1 years ago; Crawled: 2 months ago; Mr.Aggarwal referred to the judgments in General Radio (supra), Cox & Kings (supra) and Singer India (supra), to submit that the effect of an amalgamation order in respect of a tenant company is settled by the Supreme Court in favour of the landlord. ... On appeal by special leave this Court held that the amplitude of Section 14(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act was wide enough not only to include any sub-lease but even an assignment or any other mode by which possession of the tenanted premises is parted.

4. The Additional Rent Controller by order dated 05.03.2010 allowed the Eviction Petition. As far as the suit premises is concerned, the contention of the respondent that the suit property was not specifically delineated under Municipal No.4634 was rejected, and it was held that DISPL was the original tenant. Relying upon various authorities including inter alia General Radio & Appliances Co. Ltd. vs. M.A. Khader (1986) 2 SCC 656, Cox & Kings Ltd. vs. Chander Malhotra (1997) 2 SCC 687 and Singer India Ltd. vs. Chander Mohan Chadha, (2004) 7 SCC 1, the Trial Court held that amalgamation amounts to sub-letting, assigning or parting with the possession within the meaning of Section 14(1)(b) of the Act.

5. The respondent carried the matter in appeal, which was allowed by the Tribunal vide the impugned order dated 31.01.2012. The Tribunal inter alia held that the Eviction Petition was bad for non-joinder of necessary parties as DISPL had not been impleaded as a party. It was also held that the petition was not maintainable for want of permission under Section 19 of the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956. Although the question of whether amalgamation amounted to sub-letting or not was argued before the Tribunal, the Tribunal did not consider it necessary to decide the same in view of its decision on maintainability as aforesaid.

Submissions

6. I have heard Mr.Siddharth Aggarwal, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr.Alok Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent.

CM(M) 340/2012 Page 3 of 18

Mr.Kumar submitted at the outset that he was not pressing the defence based on the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956. The only issues for decision in the present case therefore are whether the amalgamation amounts to a sub-tenancy under the Act and whether the Eviction Petition was barred by limitation. Learned counsel for both the parties have addressed arguments only on these two issues.

7. Mr.Aggarwal referred to the judgments in General Radio (supra), Cox & Kings (supra) and Singer India (supra), to submit that the effect of an amalgamation order in respect of a tenant company is settled by the Supreme Court in favour of the landlord. He also relied upon the Division Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in Sadanandan vs. Pradeepan & Ors. (2001) 2 KLJ 272 to submit that sub-letting constitutes a continuing cause of action to which the bar of limitation would not apply.

8. Mr.Alok Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent distinguished the judgments of the Supreme Court in Singer India (supra) and also relied upon the decision of this Court in J.B. Exports Ltd. & Anr vs. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. (2006) 135 DLT 225 (DB) to contend that the facts of the present case do not disclose a sub-tenancy. Mr.Kumar's submission was therefore that the present case called for piercing the corporate veil and coming to the conclusion that DISPL and HRGPL were in fact one and the same. He submitted that amalgamation of DISPL with HRGPL was by way of a re-arrangement of businesses within the family and not a transfer of business or of the assets of the tenant-company. Mr.Kumar argued that CM(M) 340/2012 Page 4 of 18 the amalgamation in the present case having occurred in 1971 and the Eviction Petition having been filed in 2003, the petition was clearly outside the limitation period of twelve years prescribed by Article 66 of the Limitation Act, 1963. He cited the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ganpat Ram Sharma vs. Gayatri Devi (1987) 3 SCC 576 in support of this contention.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sh. Subhash Chand Goel vs M/S Hans Raj Gupta & Co. Pvt. Ltd on 5 March, 2010 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/108976605/)
citeturn84search4 [wordlim: 200] Published: 16.6 years ago; Crawled: 2 months ago; Ltd. i.e the respondent is one firm and it was all a family business of Lala Hansraj Gupta and both these companies were in ­ 28 ­ the nature of quasi partnerships of Hansraj Gupta and sons and even after the amalgamation of M/s Delhi Iron Syndicate Pvt. ... Khader, AIR 1986 SC 1218 that, "Company, a tenant transferring interest in tenanted premises to another company under High Court's order sanctioning scheme of amalgamation­ Consent of landlord for sub­letting as per rent agreement not obtained, it amounts to transfer of tenancy interest by tenant." ... Counsel for the petitioner is Singer India Ltd.

36. In view of above, as it is admitted fact that M/s Delhi Iron Syndicate Pvt. Ltd. was amalgamated with the respondent without the consent of the petitioner, it amounts to sub­letting, assigning or parting with possession of the suit premises. It has been held in M/s General Radio & Appliances Co. Ltd. & Ors. Vs. M.A. Khader, AIR 1986 SC 1218 that, "Company, a tenant transferring interest in tenanted premises to another company under High Court's order sanctioning scheme of amalgamation­ Consent of landlord for sub­letting as per rent agreement not obtained, it amounts to transfer of tenancy interest by tenant." Similarly, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in M/s Cox & Kings Ltd. Vs. Smt. Chander Malhotra that "Foreign Company running business in the premises­Said company assigning 60% shares to an Indian Company and allowed the Indian Company to occupy the premises­Permission of landlord not obtained - Held, it was sub­letting holding that there was a clear assignment between the Foreign Company and the Indian Company of the demised premises without any written consent of the landlord and it is a case of sub­letting within the meaning of Section 14 (1) (b) of the Act."

37. Another authority relied upon by the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner is Singer India Ltd. Vs. Chander Mohan Chadha & ­ 29 ­ Ors., 113( 2004) DLT80 (SC) in which facts of amalgamation of two companies u/s 391 and 394 of Companies Act were considered and it was held that, "Sub­letting - Amalgamation of company­ Order of Court sanctioning scheme of amalgamation under section 391 and 394 of Companies Act whereunder leases, rights of tenancy or occupancy of transferor company get vested in and become property of transferee company­It would make no difference in so far as applicability of Section 14 (1) (b) of DRC Act is concerned."

38. Although, the Ld. Counsel for the respondent has submitted that authority AIR 1986 SC 1218 relied upon by the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner is not applicable in the facts of the present case as case referred in the said authority pertains to A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act and same is not under DRC Act. But, in my considered opinion, the ratio of the said judgment as referred in the said authority is that the amalgamation of the company which is a tenant under the landlord with the another company without the written consent of the landlord amounts to sub­letting, assigning or parting with the possession of the suit premises. Apart from this, the facts of the present case are squarely covered in view of the judgment in 113 (2004) DLT 80 (SC) cited supra.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M/S Hans Raj Gupta @ Co. Pvt. Ltd vs Shri Subhash Chand Goel on 31 January, 2011 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/187689674/?type=print)
citeturn84search5 [wordlim: 200] Published: 14.7 years ago; Crawled: 4 months ago; Ltd vs Shri Subhash Chand Goel on 31 January, 2011 ...                DJ&ASJ-In-Charge(West)/ARCT,DELHI ... Thus tenant has sub-let, assigned or otherwise parted with possession of the premises to the appellant without obtaining consent in writing of the respondents herein or their predecessor in interest.
          Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi.
    
       4. Sh. Pradeep Chand
          S/o Late Sh. Suresh Chandra
          R/o E-5, Jangpura, Extn.
          New Delhi.
    
                                           ....Respondents
    
    
    RCT  No. 49/10                                             1 of 23
                                       2
    
    Date of Institution :    19.05.2010
    Arguments completed on : 19.01.2012
    Date of Order :          31.01.2012
    
    ORDER
    

1. The present appeal assails eviction order dated 05.03.2010 passed by Ld. ARC on the ground of sub- letting. The facts recited in the impugned judgment are that respondents herein were owner of property no. 4634, Ward no.7, Bazar, Ajmeri Gate, Delhi. A portion of ground floor of the said property was let out to M/s Delhi Iron Syndicate Pvt. Ltd. by predecessor in interest of the respondents herein. The said company amalgamated with appellant herein. Thus tenant has sub-let, assigned or otherwise parted with possession of the premises to the appellant without obtaining consent in writing of the respondents herein or their predecessor in interest.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
British Motor Car Company (1939) Ltd vs M/S Hindustan Commercial Bank Ltd. ... on 9 July, 2026 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/39942283/)
citeturn84search6 [wordlim: 200] Published: 2 months ago; Crawled: 4 days ago; In the context of rent control legislation, the effect of amalgamation on the tenancy rights, i.e., whether it results in sub-letting, assignment or parting with possession or not, has been considered by this Court in various judicial pronouncements. ... … Secondly, in our opinion, the Official Liquidator had merely stepped into the shoes of Laxmi Bank which was the original tenant and even if the Official Liquidator had transferred the tenancy interest to Respondent 1 under the orders of the court, it was on behalf of the original tenant.It was undoubtedly a voluntary sale which clearly fell within the mischief of Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
CIT】 [1990 Supp SCC 675 :

> AIR 1991 SC 70] (para 6) it has been held that there can be no doubt that when two companies amalgamate and merge into one, the transferor company loses its identity as it ceases to have its business. However, their respective rights or liabilities are determined under the Scheme of Amalgamation, but the corporate identity of the transferor company ceases to exist with effect from the date the amalgamation is made effective. …” (emphasis supplied)

> 11. In the context of rent control legislation, the effect of amalgamation on the tenancy rights, i.e., whether it results in sub-letting, assignment or parting with possession or not, has been considered by this Court in various judicial pronouncements.

> 11.1 In Parasram Harnand Rao (supra), while interpreting Section 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act, this Court held that the provision is of wide amplitude and covers not merely subletting but also assignment and every other mode by which possession of the tenanted premises is parted.

Rejecting the contention that an involuntary transfer of tenanted premises would fall outside the ambit of this provision, this Court held as under:

> “6. … Secondly, in our opinion, the Official Liquidator had merely stepped into the shoes of Laxmi Bank which was the original tenant and even if the Official Liquidator had transferred the tenancy interest to Respondent 1 under the orders of the court, it was on behalf of the original tenant. It was undoubtedly a voluntary sale which clearly fell within the mischief of Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. Assuming that the sale by the Official Liquidator was an involuntary sale, then it undoubtedly became an assignment as provided for by Section 14(1)(b) of Delhi Rent Control Act. … C.A. NO. 5714/2012 11

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mrs. Asha Rohtagi And Ors. vs Erstwhile New Bank Of India Through ... on 21 April, 2005 (https://indiankanoon.org/docfragment/1033921/?formInput=amalgamation+of+companies+++++++doctypes%3A+delhi)
citeturn84search7 [wordlim: 200] Published: 21.5 years ago; Crawled: 2 months ago; Vesting of tenancy rights in the Central Government or a Government company by virtue of the provisions of the statute was upheld by the apex court in the case of HPCL case (supra) and this decision was cited with approval in the case of Singer India Ltd. ... Whereas in cases of later category i.e transfer of tenancy rights under an scheme of amalgamation under provisions of company Act has been consistently held to be sub letting, assignment or parting with possession, in cases falling in the former category viz. where tenancy rights of one company are taken over by the Government and are conferred on some other government company under a statute have never been held to tantamount to sub letting, assignment or parting with possession. ... Therefore, it does not amount to sub-letting assignment or parting with possession of tenancy rights by the tenant.
There is no statutory enactment here which may give any kind of protection to the appellant."

10. It will thus be seen that consistent view of the Supreme court has been that take over of a company by the Central Government under a statute stands on a different footing then merger of two companies under the provisions of companies Act. Vesting of tenancy rights in the Central Government or a Government company by virtue of the provisions of the statute was upheld by the apex court in the case of HPCL case (supra) and this decision was cited with approval in the case of Singer India Ltd. (Supra). Whereas in cases of later category i.e transfer of tenancy rights under an scheme of amalgamation under provisions of company Act has been consistently held to be sub letting, assignment or parting with possession, in cases falling in the former category viz. where tenancy rights of one company are taken over by the Government and are conferred on some other government company under a statute have never been held to tantamount to sub letting, assignment or parting with possession. The case in hand falls in this category. As already noticed leasehold rights on PNB have been conferred by clause 4 (2) of the notification dated 4.9.93 issued under section 9 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1980 which scheme is legislative in character. It cannot fall in the category of any voluntary or involuntary transfer of interest by the tenant. Therefore, it does not amount to sub-letting assignment or parting with possession of tenancy rights by the tenant. The impugned order passed by the learned Tribunal therefore does not call for any interference.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Re: Telesound India Ltd. vs Unknown on 5 December, 1980 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1299689/)
citeturn84search8 [wordlim: 200] Published: 45.9 years ago; Crawled: 3 months ago; True, in a winding-up, the tenancy rights of the company do not constitute a transferable asset and it was so held by this court in the case of Globe Associates [1971] 1 2nd Delhi 149. ... If the transfer or vesting on amalgamation is neither an assignment nor an assignment by the transferor-company, no further question as to the transferability of any tenancy rights or permission of the landlord or of the impact on it of s. 14 or any other section of the Rent Control Act could possibly arise. ... Later decisions both in England and in India do not appear to have taken that restricted meaning or property even in respect of contracts of service.
13. True, in a winding-up, the tenancy rights of the company do not constitute a transferable asset and it was so held by this court in the case of Globe Associates [1971] 1 2nd Delhi 149. This is because on a winding-up there is no vesting of the property of the company in the official liquidator. The act of the official liquidator in dealing with the property is an act of the company in its name and on its behalf and any transfer of such property would not be saved by s. 2(d) of the Transfer of Property Act. The position would, however, be different in bankruptcy, because there the estate of the insolvent vests on insolvency by virtue of statutory provisions in the trustees and this vesting by itself has never been held to be an assignment or a transfer by the insolvent. Such vesting is by operation of law. The position of vesting on amalgamation is analogous to vesting in insolvency. The vesting in amalgamation is by operation of law and that is clear in the scheme of s. 394. Such vesting in the transferee-company on amalgamation is neither an act of the transferor-company, nor an assignment by it, but is the result of a statutory instrument. The decision, therefore, turned on compulsion and fear of perpetuation of serfdom and comprises a class apart, because of the unenforceability of a contract of personal service. Even in England the fear of serfdom of the 40s has since given place to the necessity for job security and if the pronouncement of that great English judge, perhaps the greatest judge of our times, is an index, there is talk of reinstatement and of dismissal only for good cause in a land which gave birth to the concept of absolute pleasure of the sovereign and the unenforceability of the contract of personal services. The changing economic and industrial scene has changed the emphasis and that is why in the case of Hill v. C. A. Parsons & Co. Ltd. [1971] 3 All ER 1345, Lord Denning granted reinstatement in spite of the doctrine which had held the field centuries. The majority judgment also had no possible answer as to what would have happened if instead of amalgamation, there was a simple takeover of the amalgamating company. Could the employee still have successfully asserted his right to deny to serve a new management ? Obviously not. The true concept and incident of amalgamation and the transferability of the totality of property and rights of the amalgamating company were correctly brought out by Lord Romer, in his minority opinion, with which I respectfully concur. Later decisions both in England and in India do not appear to have taken that restricted meaning or property even in respect of contracts of service. In any event, the considerations that weighed with the majority have no possible application to the case of a landlord in relation to the tenancy and this is amply borne out by the observation of the Lord Chancellor. Whatever be the position of the transfer or vesting on amalgamation, the rights of the company were still its rights and could be transferred.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hindustan Commercial Bank Ltd & Anr. vs British Motor Car Company (1934) Ltd. on 12 March, 2012 (https://indiankanoon.org/docfragment/25031903/?formInput=subletting+++++++doctypes%3A+judgments+benchid%3A+i-kaur)
citeturn84search9 [wordlim: 200] Published: 14.6 years ago; Crawled: 3 months ago; British Motor Co. ... Contention was that the tenant had sublet/assigned/parted with possession of the suit premises in favour of Punjab National Bank (PNB) without obtaining the written consent of the petitioner. ... Contention of the landlord was that this merger amounted to a subletting and the ground under Section 14 (1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act (DRCA) became available to him. ... 3 The only question which now has to be answered by this Court is whether the merger of M/s HCB with the PNB by virtue of a Gazette Notification dated 18.12.1986 issued by the Government of India under Section 45 (7) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation of the HCB (Kanpur) with the PNB amounted to a subletting under Section 14 (1)(b) of the DRCA or whether being an involuntary act, it did not attract the provisions of Section 14 (1)(b) of the said Act. ... Shephard (supra) and New Bank of India Employees Union (supra) coupled with the judgment of the Apex Court reported in (2004) 7 SCC 1 Singer India Ltd.

### Matching Fragments

1 The impugned judgment is dated 21.05.2001. It had disposed of two appeals, one filed by the landlord i.e. British Motor Co. Ltd. and the other by the tenant i.e. Hindustan Commercial Bank Ltd. (HCB). The eviction petition filed by the landlord being EP No.229/1988 had been dismissed by the Additional Rent Controller (ARC) vide judgment dated 03.11.1995. Appeal filed by the landlord was allowed; eviction petition stood decreed. This was on the ground of subletting as contained in Section 14 (1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act (DRCA). Tenant is aggrieved by this finding.

2 Briefly stated the facts are that the landlord was aggrieved by an act of subletting of his tenant M/s HCB. Contention was that the tenant had sublet/assigned/parted with possession of the suit premises in favour of Punjab National Bank (PNB) without obtaining the written consent of the petitioner. It is not in dispute that M/s HCB had since been amalgamated with PNB by virtue of a Gazette Notification issued by the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) Govt. of India; necessary effect was that M/s HCB became non-existent and its complete power and control vested with the transferee company i.e. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Rajinder Dhawan & Ors. vs Gobind Parshad Jagdish Parshad & Ors. on 12 April, 2023 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/91885777/)
citeturn84search10 [wordlim: 200] Published: 3.5 years ago; Crawled: 2 months ago; 10.12.1961 and later on said Laxmi Commercial Bank Limited further amalgamated with respondent no.1 we.f. ... Hence, petitioner has filed present petition for eviction of the said respondents on the ground of illegal sub-letting, u/s 14(1)(b)DRC Act."
> "Petitioner is the landlord of premises in question, which are non residential in nature. Said premises were initially let out to Pratap Bank Limited in 1944. by M/s Gobind Parshad Jagdish Parshad HUF, which remained as an HUF till 31.12.1949, when it was disrupted and a partnership under the name and style of Gobind Parshad Jagdish Parshad, came into existence, w.ef. 01.01.1950. Pratap Bank Limited, subsequently amalgamated with Laxmi Commercial Bank Limited w.e.f. 10.12.1961 and later on said Laxmi Commercial Bank Limited further amalgamated with respondent no.1 we.f. 23.08.1985. Since January 2008, respondent no. 1 in arrears of rent, at the rate of Rs. 575per month. Petitioner has come to know through reply, in response to its RTI application that respondent no. 1 has illegally and unauthorizedly, without permission of petitioner and consent in writing of petitioner has sub-letted, assigned or parted with the possession of premises in question to respondent no. 2 to 6 and it is respondent no. 2 to 6 who are in exclusive possession of different portion of premises in question since 09.06.1952. Respondent no. 2 is in possession of portion Marked A, in the site plan, respondent no. 3 is in possession of portion Marked B in the site plan, respondent no. 4 is in possession of portion Marked C in the site plan, respondent no. 5Jin the possession of portion Marked Din the site plan and respondent no. 6 is in the possession of portion Marked E in the site plan. Respondent no. 2 is paying rent of Rs. 180 per month to respondent no. 1, respondent no. 3 is paying rent of Rs. 165 per month to respondent no. 1, respondent no. 4 is paying Rs. 80 per month to respondent no. 1, respondent no. 5 is paying Rs. 187.50 per month to respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 6 is paying Rs. 115 per month to respondent no. I. Hence, petitioner has filed present petition for eviction of the said respondents on the ground of illegal sub-letting, u/s 14(1)(b)DRC Act."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Atlas And Union Jute Press Co. Ltd. vs Kingslay Industries Limited on 29 March, 2007 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1445232/)
citeturn84search11 [wordlim: 200] Published: 19.5 years ago; Crawled: 2 weeks ago; Lawyer for the appellant where the question of eviction on the ground of subletting Under Section 14(1)(b) of Delhi Rent Control Act arose and where American company was amalgamated with Indian company under the scheme of amalgamation sanctioned by High Court by order under Sections 391 and 394 of the Companies Act and there was transfer of tenancy right by virtue of scheme of amalgamation not contemplated by provisions of Act and order of eviction was held proper by the Apex Court.It was held there that the applicability of Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act depends upon occurrence on a factual situation namely subletting or assignment of otherwise parting with possession of the whole or any part of the premises by the tenant.
Subsequently, with the permission of RBI the Indian company incorporated in which the foreign company having 40% share. Pursuant to agreement between the two companies, the Indian company becoming the assignee with all rights and liabilities and subject to observance of the terms and conditions of all the tenancy rights contained in the leases or agreements for lease under which the same were being held by the foreign company. Accordingly, the Indian company was carrying on the same business in the premises without obtaining written consent of landlord. It was held that it amounted to subletting or at least assignment and constituted a ground for eviction Under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. The contention the transfer of leasehold interest was under statutory compulsion not sustainable.

17. In the case reported in AIR 2004 SC at page 4368; relied by ld. Lawyer for the appellant where the question of eviction on the ground of subletting Under Section 14(1)(b) of Delhi Rent Control Act arose and where American company was amalgamated with Indian company under the scheme of amalgamation sanctioned by High Court by order under Sections 391 and 394 of the Companies Act and there was transfer of tenancy right by virtue of scheme of amalgamation not contemplated by provisions of Act and order of eviction was held proper by the Apex Court. It was held there that the applicability of Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act depends upon occurrence on a factual situation namely subletting or assignment of otherwise parting with possession of the whole or any part of the premises by the tenant. Whether it is a voluntary act of the tenant or otherwise and also for reasons for doing so are wholly relevant and can have no bearing. It was further held that even there is an order of a Court sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation under Sections 391 and 394 of the Companies Act whereunder the leases rights of tenancy or occupancy of the transferor company got vested, in and becoming property of the transferee company it would make no defence in so far as the applicability of Section 14(1)(b) is concerned as the Act does not make any exception in favour of a lessee who may have adopted such course of action in order to secure compliance of law.


