Celina Coelho Pereira & Ors vs Ulhas Mahabaleshwar Kholkar & Ors on 30 October, 2009 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1312881/)
citeturn141view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"turn139view0","lineno":172}); Total lines: 280
L163: Thus, in the case of sub-letting, the onus lying on the landlord would stand discharged by adducing prima facie proof of the fact that the alleged sub-tenant was in exclusive possession of the premises or, to borrow the language of cite29†Section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act, was holding right to enjoy such property. A presumption of sub-letting 1 may then be raised and would amount to proof unless rebutted.
L164: In the context of the premises having been sub-let or possession parted with by the tenant by adopting the device of entering into partnership, it would suffice for us to notice three decisions of this Court. Murlidhar v. Chuni Lal (1970 Ren CJ 922) is a case where a shop was let out to a firm of the name of Chuni Lal Gherulal. The firm consisted of three partners, namely, Chuni Lal, Gherulal and Meghraj.
L165: This partnership closed and a new firm by the name of Meghraj Bansidhar commenced its business with partners Meghraj and Bansidhar. The tenant firm was sought to be evicted on the ground that the old firm and the new firm being two different legal entities, the occupation of the shop by the new firm amounted to sub-letting.
L166: This Court discarded the contention as "entirely without substance" and held that a partnership firm is not a legal entity; the firm name is only a compendious way of describing the partners of the firm. Therefore, occupation by a firm is only occupation by its partners.
L167: The two firms, old and new, had a common partner, namely, Meghraj, who continued to be in possession and it was fallacious to contend that earlier he was in possession in the capacity of partner of the old firm and later as a partner of the new firm. The landlord, in order to succeed, has to prove it as a fact that there was a sub- letting by his tenant to another firm.
L168: As the premises continued to be in possession of one of the original tenants, Meghraj, then by a mere change in the constitution of the firm of which Meghraj continued to be a partner, an inference as to sub-letting could not be drawn in the absence of further evidence having been adduced to establish sub-letting. In cite18†Helper Girdharbhai v. Saiyed Mohd. Mirasaheb Kadri [(1987) 3 SCC 538] the tenant had entered into a partnership and the firm was carrying on business in the tenancy premises.
L169: This Court held that if there was a partnership firm of which the appellant was a partner as a tenant, the same would not amount to sub-letting leading to forfeiture of the tenancy; for there cannot be a sub-letting unless the lessee parted with the legal possession. The mere fact that another person is allowed to use the premises while the lessee retains the legal possession is not enough to create a sub-lease.
L170: Thus, the thrust is, as cite18†laid down by this Court, on finding out who is in legal possession of the premises. So long as the legal possession remains with the tenant the mere factum of the tenant having entered into partnership for the purpose of carrying on the business in the tenancy premises would not amount to sub-letting. In cite27†Parvinder Singh v. Renu Gautam 1 [(2004) 4 SCC 794] a three-Judge Bench of this Court devised the test in these terms: (SCC p.
L171: 799, para 8) "If the tenant is actively associated with the partnership business and retains the use and control over the tenancy premises with him, maybe along with the partners, the tenant may not be said to have parted with possession.
L172: However, if the user and control of the tenancy premises has been parted with and deed of partnership has been drawn up as an indirect method of collecting the consideration for creation of sub-tenancy or for providing a cloak or cover to conceal a transaction not permitted by law, the court is not estopped from tearing the veil of partnership and finding out the real nature of transaction entered into between the tenant and the alleged sub- tenant"."
L173: 26. In cite31†Vaishakhi Ram and Others v. Sanjeev Kumar Bhatiani9 , one of us (Tarun Chatterjee, J.), in a case of subletting under cite32†Section 14(1)(b) of Delhi Rent Control Act, held:
L174: > "A plain reading of this provision would show that if a tenant has sub-let or assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord, he would be liable to be evicted from the said premises. That is to say, the following ingredients must be satisfied before an order of eviction can be passed on the ground of sub-letting:
L175: > (1) the tenant has sub-let or assigned or parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises;
L176: 
L177: > (2) such sub-letting or assigning or parting with the possession has been done without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord."
L178: .............."It is well settled that the burden of proving sub- letting is on the landlord but if the landlord proves that the sub-tenant is in exclusive possession of the suit premises, 9 (2008) 14 SCC 356 1 then the onus is shifted to the tenant to prove that it was not a case of sub-letting."
L179: 
L180: 27. In Nirmal Kanta (Dead) Through LRs. v. Ashok Kumar and Another10 , this Court held thus :
L181: > "What constitutes sub-letting has repeatedly fallen for the consideration of this Court in various cases and it is now well-established that a sub-tenancy or a sub-letting comes into existence when the tenant inducts a third party stranger to the landlord into the tenanted accommodation and parts with possession thereof wholly or in part in favour of such third party and puts him in exclusive possession thereof.
L182: The lessor and/or a landlord seeking eviction of a lessee or tenant alleging creation of a sub-tenancy has to prove such allegation by producing proper evidence to that effect. Once it is proved that the lessee and/or tenant has parted with exclusive possession of the demised premises for a monetary consideration, the creation of a sub-tenancy and/or the allegation of sub-letting stands established."
L183: 28. The legal position that emerges from the aforesaid decisions can be summarised thus :
L184: 
L185: > (i) In order to prove mischief of subletting as a ground for eviction under rent control laws, two ingredients have to be established, (one) parting with possession of tenancy or part of it by tenant in favour of a third party with exclusive right of possession and (two) that such parting with possession has 10 (2008) 7 SCC 722 2 been done without the consent of the landlord and in lieu of compensation or rent.
L186: > (ii) Inducting a partner or partners in the business or profession by a tenant by itself does not amount to subletting.
L187: 
L188: However, if the purpose of such partnership is ostensible and a deed of partnership is drawn to conceal the real transaction of sub-letting, the court may tear the veil of partnership to find out the real nature of transaction entered into by the tenant.
L189: (iii) The existence of deed of partnership between tenant and alleged sub-tenant or ostensible transaction in any other form would not preclude the landlord from bringing on record material and circumstances, by adducing evidence or by means of cross-examination, making out a case of sub-letting or parting with possession in tenancy premises by the tenant in favour of a third person.
L190: (iv) If tenant is actively associated with the partnership business and retains the control over the tenancy premises with him, may be along with partners, the tenant may not be said to have parted with possession.
L191: 
L192: 2
L193: (v) Initial burden of proving subletting is on landlord but once he is able to establish that a third party is in exclusive possession of the premises and that tenant has no legal possession of the tenanted premises, the onus shifts to tenant to prove the nature of occupation of such third party and that he (tenant) continues to hold legal possession in tenancy premises.
L194: (vi) In other words, initial burden lying on landlord would stand discharged by adducing prima facie proof of the fact that a party other than tenant was in exclusive possession of the premises. A presumption of sub-letting may then be raised and would amount to proof unless rebutted.
L195: 29. The main question that falIs to be determined in the present case is: is High Court justified in non-suiting the landlord on the ground that he has not pleaded that business of the firm M/s. Mandovi Tours and Travels is not conducted by its partners, but by Balaji Lawande and Netravalkar and that tenant has parted with the premises by subletting the same to these two persons under the garb of deed of partnership by constituting a bogus firm? In our judgment, the answer have to 2 be in negative.
L196: In the plaint, the landlord averred that the tenant has sub-let the premises to M/s. Mandovi Tours and Travels, a partnership concern, without his permission and that the sub-lessee has been exclusively running the business in the rented premises although he has not pleaded specifically that the premises have been sublet to Balaji Lawande and Netravalkar but such lack of pleading cannot be held to be fatal.
L197: It has to be kept in mind that a transaction such as sub-letting by tenant which is not permissible under lease may be outwardly a deceptive arrangement and landlord may not come to know of true facts. The pleadings in such matters ought not to be construed too technically. The true test, as has been repeatedly said, is to see whether the other side has been taken by surprise or prejudiced.
L198: 30. If the purpose of constituting partnership by the tenant is ostensible and a deed of partnership is drawn to conceal the real transaction of subletting in a given case, the court may be required to tear the veil of partnership to find out the real nature of transaction entered into by the tenant and in such circumstances the evidence let in by the landlord cannot 2 be ignored on the ground that there is some variance between pleading and proof.
L199: In a case such as the present one, the rule of secundum allegata et probata is not strictly applicable as the tenant cannot be said to have been put to any prejudice.
L200: 31. The High Court, as the discussion in impugned judgment shows, has been too technical in construing the pleadings of the case overlooking the fact that plea of sub- letting has been set up by landlord in the plaint and there has been full and critical examination of the evidence by the Additional Rent Controller as well as the Administrative Tribunal. The Additional Rent Controller and the Administrative Tribunal cannot be said to have misdirected themselves either on law or on facts.
L201: Both Authorities found as a fact that Mandovi Tours and Travels was not a genuine partnership and it was formed to cover up the subletting of the suit premises. They also found as a fact that the partnership having not been found to be genuine partnership, it was difficult to hold that the tenant continued to have a control over the suit premises. These findings recorded by the Administrative Tribunal as well as the Additional Rent Controller are based on 2 the consideration of evidence on record.
L202: In any case, it cannot be said that the aforesaid view of the Rent Control Authorities is not a possible view.
L203: 32. In Bathutmal Raichand Oswal v. Laxmibai R. Tarta And Another11, this Court held :
L204: 
L205: > "The High Court cannot in guise of exercising its jurisdiction under cite12†Article 227 convert itself into a court of appeal when the Legislature has not conferred a right of appeal and made the decision of the subordinate court or tribunal final on facts."
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Krishnawati vs Hans Raj on 29 November, 1973 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/114533/)
citeturn141view1 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"turn139view1","lineno":160}); Total lines: 242
L148: On or about September 10, 1959 the respondent landlord let out the premises in suit to the appellant on a rent of Rs. 125/- per month. The premises consisted of a shop. On 1-9- 1962 the respondent applied under cite16†section 14 of the above Act to the Rent Controller, Delhi for evicting the appellant on the ground that she had sub-let the entire premises to one Sohan Singh who, according to the respondent, was running a business under the name of Royal Dispensing Chemists and Druggists in the shop.
L149: It was further alleged that the appellant was charging a fabulous amount as rent from her sub-tenant Sohan Singh. The appellant in her written statement admitted the tenancy but denied sub- letting. She alleged that Sohan Singh was her husband and from the time of the lease the business of a Chemist was being run there in the premises by her husband and she also occasionally helped him in the running of the business.
L150: The Rent Controller was of the view that the appellant was the legally Wedded wife of Sohan Singh. In any event he held, Sohan Singh and the appellant were living together as husband and wife and, therefore, there was no question of any sub--letting by the appellant of the premises. That finding was confirmed in appeal by the Rent Control Tribunal, Delhi. Aggrieved by the decision, the respondent went in second appeal to the High Court under cite17†section 39(1) of the Act.
L151: It was contended before the court by the respondent that two substantial questions of law and fact were involved in the appeal-one relating to the status of the appellant as wife and the other whether on the facts found the ground of sub-letting had been established. The learned single Judge agreed that the appeal involved substantial questions of law as submitted, and came to the conclusion that there was sub-setting in favour of Sohan Singh. Accordingly, he gave an order for evicting the appellant.
L152: So this appeal by special leave. It is contended on behalf of the appellant that the learned single Judge has interfered with a pure finding of fact. Under cite14†section 39(2) of the Act the High Court could interfere in second appeal only if there was a substantial question of law.
L153: In the present case, he submitted, there was no question of law, much less substantial question of law and, therefore, the High Court was in error in interfering with the concurrent finding of the Rent Control authorities, There is great force in this contention. The High Court has dealt with the case as if this is a matrimonial proceeding-in which the status of the appellant as the wife of Sohan M8--602 SUP CI/74 526 Singh was under direct challenge.
L154: The simple question which had to be determined in the case was whether having regard to the fact that the appellant and Sohan Singh were living as husband and wife, it was open to draw, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the factual inference that the wife had sub-let the premises to her husband. Sub-letting like letting, is a particular type of demise of immovable property and is distinct from permissive user like that of a licensee.
L155: If two persons live together in a house as husband and wife and one of them who owns the house allows the other to carry on business in a part of it,it will be in the absence of any other evidence, a rash inference to draw that the owner has let out that part of the premises. And that is what the learned single Judge has done in the present case.
L156: He was of the view that even if it is assumed that the appellant was the wife of Sohan Singh, she, who was entitled to possession of the shop premises as a tenant, must be presumed to have sub-let the same to Sohan Singh to carry on his business, In support of this conclusion he relied on clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of cite16†section 14 of the Act read with sub-cite18†section 4 of that section. The provisions are as follows :
L157: > 14(1) Provided that the Controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an order for the rec overy of possession of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only, namely
L158: 
L159: > (a)..........................
L160: 
L161: > (b) that the tenant has, on or after the 9th day of June, 1952 sub-let, assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord;"
L162: > Sub-section (4) of cite16†section 14 is as follows : "(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1),any premises which have been let for being used for the purposes of business or profession shall be deemed to have been sub-let by the tenant, if the Controller is satisfied that the tenant without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord has, after the 16th day of August, 1958, allowed any person or occupy the whole or any part of the premises ostensibly on the ground that such person is a partner of the tenant in the business or profession but really for the purpose of sub-letting such premises to that person.
L163: Under sub-section (4) referred to above the premises could be deemed to have been sub-let by the tenant only when the Controller is satisfied that some person is let into possession ostensibly as a partner in business but really for the purposes of sub-letting. These provisions evidently have no application to the facts of the present case.
L164: It is not the case of anybody that the appellant was the owner of the business carried on in the premises and she had let in Sohan Singh into possession ostensibly as a partner in their business. The learned Judge was, 527 therefore, in error in relying on the provisions of the Act for presuming that the appellant must have sub-let the premises.
L165: The case of the respondent in his application under cite16†section 14 of of the Act was that the appellant had sub-let the whole premises to Sohan Singh who was running the business under the name of Royal Dispensing Chemists and Druggists and that the entire premises have been sub-let by the appellant and the appellant had completely parted with possession without the written consent of the respondent.
L166: It was also alleged that the appellant was charging fabulous amount of rent from the sub-tenant Sohan Singh. Sub-letting was,' therefore, the principal ground on which eviction was sought. When eviction is sought on that ground it is now settled law that the onus to prove sub-letting is on the landlord. If the landlord prima-facie shows that the occupant who was in exclusive possession of the premises let out for valuable consideration, it would then be for the tenant to rebut the evidence.
L167: See:cite19†Associated Hotels of India Ltd., Delhi V. S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh (1).In the present case the respondent produced no evidence to show such sub-letting in spite of the appellant's denial in the written statement of any sub-letting. It was averred by her therein that Sohan Singh was her husband and that right from the taking of the shop premises on rent Sohan Singh was carrying on business of a Chemist therein and appellant also helped him occasionally as his wife.
L168: The averment that she was the wife of Sohan Singh provided the necessary ammunition for a formidable battle in which the respondent took upon himself to show that she was not the legally married wife of Sohan Singh. He called Sohan Singh's first wife as his first witness in this case but all that the lady was able to say was that she had no knowledge if the appellant was married to Sohan Singh but she knew that he lived with the appellant since about six years before her deposition, recorded in 1963.
L169: The respondent himself in his testimony admitted that he had never himself made any enquiry as to whether Sohan Singh and the appellant are husband and wife or not. Nor could he deny that they were living together. His reasons for saying that Sohan Singh was a sub-tenant were in his own words ; "As Sohan Singh is the tenant, I can, therefore, say that the capital invested in the shop might be that of Sohan Singh.
L170: Neither any talks regarding sub-letting took place in my presence, nor the rent was paid in my presence," In undertaking to prove that the appellant was not Sohan Singh's wife the respondent completely lost sight of his own weak position. The appel- lant had passed a rent note in the respondent's favour and it was the case of the appellant that in that rent note the respondent had in his own handwriting written' that the appellant was the wife of Sohan Singh.
L171: The appellant summoned him to produce his rent note but the respondent did not produce it. So in his cross examination he was shown a typed copy of it and this he accepted as a true copy. The true copy disclosed that the appellant was accepted as the wife of Sohan Singh. Besides, when the appellant and Sohan Singh gave evidence of the ,fact that they were living as husband and wife and looking after the (1) [1968] 2 S.C.R. 548.
L172: 528
L173: business in the shop there was hardly any cross examination on the point. The respondent relied principally on some previous self-serving statements made by Sohan Singh in other proceedings which could not be used as substantive evidence in the present case.
L174: The evidence was clear namely, that to the knowledge of the respondent, the appel- lant and Sohan Singh were living as husband and wife and from the day the rent note was passed by the appellant in 1959 a Chemist's shop was opened in the premises which was run principally by Sohan Singh but occasionally by the appellant also. The question is whether that evidence gives rise to the factual inference that the appellant had sublet the premises to Sohan Singh. The first two courts held that it did not.
L175: This was a concurrent finding of fact and it seems to us that the learned counsel for the appellant is right in contending that the High Court in second appeal should not have interfered with that finding especially when cite14†section 39(2) of the Act provides that no appeal shall it to the High Court unless 'the appeal involved some substantial question of law.
L176: The learned single Judge thought that two substantial questions of law were involved-one relating to the status of the appellant as the alleged wife of Sohan Singh and the second whether on the facts found, sub-letting was established. Both these questions involved, according to the learned Judge, substantial questions of mixed fact and law.
L177: As to the first question whether the appellant was legally married, that was a question on which no finding was necessary in an eviction suit. It was sufficient for the Rent Court to proceed on the finding that the appellant and Sohan Singh were living as husband and wife, whether they were legally married or not. This was specifically pointed out by the Additional Rent Controller in his judgment. As regards the second question, one does not see how it is a mixed question of law and fact.
L178: In the 'determination of a question of fact no application of any principle of law is required in finding either the basic facts or arriving at the ultimate conclusion; in a mixed question of law and fact the ultimate conclusion has to be drawn by applying principles of law to basic findings. See : cite20†Meenakshi Mills, Madurai v.
L179: The Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras (1).The basic facts in the present case were (1) the appellant and Sohan Singh were living as husband and wife to the knowledge of the respondent; (2) the appellant took the lease of the shop premises from the respondent in 1959; (3) from the time of the letting a Chemist's business was carried in the shop by Sohan Singh with the occasional help of the appellant.
L180: The question to be determined was whether in the above circumstances it was likely that the appellant had (1) [1956] S.C.R. 691.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Girdhari Lal & Sons vs Balbir Nath Mathur & Ors on 26 February, 1986 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/614998/)
citeturn141view2 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"turn139view2","lineno":260}); Total lines: 371
L251: Form "E" provides for a statement of full particulars of the demised premises, such as the street, municipal ward and house number, names of the tenant and the sub-tenant, details of the portion sublet, rent payable by the sub-tenant, date of creation of the sub- tenancy, etc. It may be worthwhile to restate and explain at this state certain well known principles of Interpretation of Statutes: Words are but mere vehicles of thought. They are meant to express or convey one's thoughts.
L252: Generally, a person's words and thoughts are coincidental. No problem arises then, but, not in frequently, then are not. It is common experience with most men, that occasionally there are no adequate words to express some of their thoughts. Words which very nearly express the thoughts may be found but not words which will express precisely. There is then a great fumbling for words. Long winded explanations and, in conversation, even gestures are resorted to.
L253: Ambiguous words and words which unwittingly convey more than one meaning are used. Where different interpretations are likely to be put on words and a question 390 arises what an individual meant when he used certain words, he may be asked to explain himself and he may do so and say that he meant one thing and not the other.
L254: But if it is the legislature that has expressed itself by making the laws and difficulties arise in interpreting what the legislature has said, a legislature can not be asked to sit to resolve those difficulties. The legislatures, unlike on individuals, cannot come forward to explain themselves as often as difficulties of interpretation arise. So the task of interpreting the laws by finding out what the legislature meant is allotted to the courts.
L255: Now, if one person puts into words the thoughts of another (as the draftsman puts into words the thoughts of the legislature) and a third person (the court) is to find out what they meant, more difficulties are bound to crop up. The draftsman may not have caught the spirit of the legislation at all; the words used by him may not adequately convey what 18 meant to be conveyed; the words may be ambiguous; they may be words capable of being differently understood by different persons.
L256: How are the courts to set about the task of resolving difficulties of interpretation of the laws? The foremost task of a court, as we conceive it, in the Interpretation of Statutes, 18 to find out the intention of the legislature. Of course, where words are clear and unambiguous no question of construction may arise. Such words ordinarily speak for themselves.
L257: Since the words must have spoken as clearly to legislators as to judges, lt may be safely presumed that the legislature intended what the words plainly say. This is the real basis of the so called golden rule of construction that where the words of statutes are plain and unambiguous effect must be given to them.
L258: A court should give effect to plain words, not because there is any charm or magic in the plainness of such words but because plain words may be expected to convey plainly the intention of the Legislature to other as well as judges. Intention of the legislature and not the words is paramount.
L259: Even where the words of statutes appear to be prima facie clear and unambiguous it may some times be possible that the plain meaning of the worts does not convey and may even defeat the intention of the legislature; in such cases there is no reason why the true intention of the legislature, if it can be determined, clearly by other means, should not be given effect. Words are meant to serve and not to govern and we are not to add the tyranny of words to the other tyrannies of the world.
L260: 391
L261: 
L262: Parliamentary intention may be gathered from several sources. First, of course, it must be gathered from the statute itself, next from the preamble to the statute, next from the Statement of Objects and Reasons, thereafter from Parliamentary debates, reports of Committees and Commissions which preceded the legislation and finally from all legitimate and admissible sources from where there may be light. Regard must be had to legislative history too.
L263: Once Parliamentary intention is ascertained and the object and purpose of the legislation is known, it then becomes the duty of the court to give the statute a purposeful or a functional interpretation. this is what is meant when, for example, it is said that measures aimed at social amelioration should receive liberal or beneficent construction. Again, the words of a statute may not be designed to meet the several uncontemplated forensic situations that may arise.
L264: The draftsman may have designed his words to meet what Lord Simon of Glaisdale calls the 'primary situation'. It will then become necessary for the court to impute an intention to Parliament in regard to 'secondary situations'. Such 'secondary intention' may be imputed in relation to a secondary situation so as to best serve the same purpose as the primary statutory intention does in relation to a primary situation.
L265: So we see that the primary and foremost task of a court in interpreting a statute is to ascertain the intention of the legislature, actual or imputed. Having ascetained the intention, the court must then strive to so interpret the statute as to promote or advance the object and purpose of the enactment. For this purpose, where necessary the court may even depart from the rule that plain words should be interpreted according to their plain meaning.
L266: There need be no neek and mute submission to the plainness of the language. To avoid patent injustice, anamoly or absurdity or to avoid invalidation of a law, the court would be well justified in departing from the so-called golden rule of construction so as to give effect to the object and purpose of the enactment by supplementing, the written word if necessary.
L267: In an old English case, Hawkins v. Gathercole, 43 English Reports 1129, Turner, CJ., referred to two earlier cases reported by Plowden. In the first case of Stradling v. Morgan, 392 the Judges were reported to have said :
L268: > "That the Judges of the law in all times past have so far pursued the intent of the makers of the statutes, that they have expounded Acts which were general in words to be but particular, where the intent was particular ........
L269: From which cases it apears that the sages of the law heretofore have construed statutes quite contrary to the letter in some appearance; and those statutes which comprehend all things in the letter, they have expounded to extend but to somethings; and those which generally prohibit all people from doing such an act, they have interpreted to permit some people to do it; and those which include every person in the letter, they have adjudged to reach to some persons only; which expositions have always been founded upon the intent of the Legislature, which they have collect ed, sometimes by considering the cause and necessity of making the Act, sometimes by comparing one part of the Act with another, and sometimes by foreign circumstances, so that they have ever been guided by the intent of the Legislature, which they have always taken according to the necessity of the matter, and according to that which 18 consonant to reason and good discretion.
L270: > Turner, CJ himself added, "The passages to which I have referred have selected only as containing the best summary with which I acquainted of the law upon this subject In determining the question before us, we have therefore, to consider not merely the words of this Act of Parliament, but the intent of the Legislature, to be collected from the cause and necessity of the Act being made, from a comparison of its several parts, and from foreign (meaning extraneous) circumstances so far as they can justly be considered to throw light upon the subject."
L271: In a forthright pronouncement Goulding, J. said in Comet Radio Vision & Services v. Farnell Trand Borg, [1971] 393 All E.R. 230.
L272: 
L273: > "...The language of parliament though not to be extended beyond its fair construction, is not to be interpreted in so slavishly literal a way as to stultify the manifest purpose of the legislature."
L274: 
L275: In Seaford Court Estates Limited v. Ashor [1949] 2 All E.R. 155 Lord Denning, who referred to Plowden's Reports already mentioned by us, said :
L276: > "Whenever a statute comes up for consideration, it must be remembered that it is not within human powers to foresee the manifold sets of facts which may arise, and, even if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in terms free from all ambiguity..... A Judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman.
L277: He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament, and he must do this not only from the language of the statute, but also from a construction of the social conditions which gave rise to it and of the mischief which it was passed to remedy and then he must supplement the written word so as to give force and life to the intention of the legislature.
L278: Put into homely metaphor, it is this: A judge should ask himself the question how, if the makers of the Act had themselves come across this ruck in the contexture of it they would have straightened it out? He must then do what they would have done. A judge should not alter the material of which the Act is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases."
L279: In Rughy Joint Water Board v. Foottit [1972] 1 A.E.R. 1057, Lord Simon of Glaisdale said :
L280: 
L281: > "The task of the courts is to ascertain what was the intention of Parliament, actual or to be imputed, in relation to the facts as found by the court....But on scrutiny of a statutory provision, it will generally appear that a given situation was within the direct contemplation of the draftsman as 394 the situation calling for statutory regulation:
L282: > this may be called the primary situation. As to this, Parliament will certainly have manifested an intention -'The Primary Statutory Intention'. But situations other than the primary situation may present themselves for judicial decisions secondary situations. As regards these secondary situations, it may seem likely in some cases that the draftsman had them in contemplation; in others not.
L283: Where it seems likely that a secondary situation was not within the draftsman's contemplation, it will be necessary for the court to impute an intention to Parliament in the way I have described, that is, to determine what would have been this statutory intention if the secondary situation had been within Parliamentary contemplation (a secondary intention)."
L284: It may not be out of place to refer here to what Harold Laski said in his Report of the Committee on Ministers' powers:
L285: > "The present methods of statutory interpretation make the task of considering the relationship of statutes, especially in the realm of great social experiments, to the social welfare they are intend ed to promote one in which the end involved may become unduly narrowed, either by reason of the unconscious assumptions of the Judge or because he is observing the principles of interpretation devised to suit interests we are no longer concerned to protect in the same degree as formerly...The method of interpretation should be less analytical and more functional in character; it should seek to discover the effect of the legislative precept in action so as to give full weight to the social value it is intended to secure."
L286: In 1981, the Australian Parliament added a new section 15AA(1) to the cite19†Acts Interpretation Act, 1901 , requiring that in statutory interpretation "A construction that would promote the purpose or object" of an Act (even if not expressed in the Act), be preferred to one that would not promote that purpose 395 or object. Julius Stone in his 'Precedent And Law - Dynamics of Common Law Growth' also refers to this provision.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M/S. Cox & Kings Ltd. & Anr vs Smt.Chander Malhotra on 12 December, 1996 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1707845/)
citeturn141view3 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1707845/","lineno":null}); Total lines: 168

