Associated Hotels Of India Ltd., Delhi vs S. B. Sardar Ranjit Singh on 7 December, 1967 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/923000/)
citeturn147view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/923000/","lineno":220}); Total lines: 303
L212: (1) [196] 1 S.C.R. 36F 554 meats were being withheld. The stamp auditor noted on the documents the deficiency-in stamps and penalty leviable on them on the footing that they were lease deeds. The appellant did not contest this note nor paid the penalty and deficiency as directed by the trial Court. -The surprising feature of the case is that the appellant did not attempt to prove any of the documents.
L213: Where the agreement is in writing, it is a question of construction of the agreement whether the grant is a lease or a license. It was for the appellant to prove the written agreements, and the Court could then construe them. The appellant has not brought before the Court the best and the primary evidence of the terms on which the apartments were being occupied. The onus to prove sub-letting was on the respondent.
L214: The respondent discharged the onus by leading evidence showing that the occupants were in exclusive possession of the apartments for valuable consideration. The appellant chose not to rebut this prime facie evidence by proving and exhibiting the relevant agreements. The documents formed part of the appellant's case. The appellant bad no right to withhold them from the scrutiny of the Court.
L215: In the absence of the best evidence of the grants, the Courts below properly inferred sub-lettings from the other materials on the record.
L216: The test of exclusive possession, though not conclusive, is a very important indication in favour of tenancy, see Addiscombe Garden Estates Ltd. and Anr. v. Crabbe and Ors.(1) The argument is that as the landlord is living in the premises, that fact raises the presumption that he intends to retain the control of the whole of the premises and that the occupation of the other parts is that of a lodger or inmate and not that of a tenant, and reliance was placed on Helman v.
L217: Horsham Assessment Committee(2) and the cases referred to therein. Those cases consider what constitute rateable occupation. In the case last cited, Denning, L. J. said that a person who is regarded as a lodger for rating purposes need not necessarily be a lodger for the purposes of the Rent Restriction Acts, while Evershed L.J. seems to have expressed a contrary opinion.
L218: Normally, an occupier of an apartment in a hotel is in the position of a licensee as the hotel-keeper retains the general control of the hotel including the apartment. But it is not a necessary inference of law that the occupier of an apartment in a hotel is not a tenant. Where, as in this case, the hotel-keeper retains no control over the apart- ment, the occupier is in the position of a tenant. In Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 23, Art. 1028, p.
L219: 433, the law is accurately summarised thus "A lodger who has no separate apartment is only a licensee, and, even though he has a separate apart-
L220: (1) [1958] 1 Q.B. 513, 525.
L221: 
L222: (2) [1949] 2 K.B. 335.
L223: 
L224: 555
L225: ment, he has not in law an exclusive occupation, and is therefore in the position of a licensee, if the landlord retains the general control and dominion of the house, including the part occupied by the lodger; but, if in fact the landlord exercises no control over that part, the occupier is a tenant.
L226: The occupier does not, however, become a lodger merely by reason of the fact that the landlord resides on the premises and retains control of the passages and staircases and other parts used in common." On the question whether the occupier of a separate apartment in a premises is a licensee or a tenant, the test is-has the landlord retained control over the apartment ? The fact that the apartment is a room in a hotel may lead to the inference that the hotel-keeper retains the general dominion of the en-tire hotel including the apartment and that the occupier is in the position of a lodger or inmate.
L227: But the inference is not a necessary inference of law. Where, as in this case, the best evidence of the -rant was withheld from the scrutiny of the Court, the inference was rightly drawn that the occupiers were tenants.
L228: At the hearing of this appeal, the appellant moved an appli- cation for reception of the documents as additional evidence. The genuineness of the documents was disputed by the respondent. In the Courts below, the appellant made no attempt to prove these documents. We found no ground for directing a new trial. Having regard to all these facts, we dismissed the application.
L229: The hotel building constitutes premises within the meaning of s. 2(g) of the Act.' It is because the hotel building constitutes Premises that the appellant can claim protection from eviction under the Act. A room in a hotel is a part of the hotel premises. A sub-letting of a room in a hotel in contravention of cls. (b) and (c) of the proviso to cite13†s. 13 (1 ) is a ground for eviction under the Act.
L230: cite18†Section 2(g) provides that 'premises' does not include " a room in a hotel or lodging house." The sub-lessee of a room in a hotel is, therefore, not a tenant and cannot claim protection under s. 13 from eviction, nor can he ask for fixation of standard rent. see cite17†Associated Hotels of India Ltd. v. R. N. Kapoor (1).
L231: If the interest of the tenant of the hotel premises is determined, the sub-tenant to whom a room in the hotel has been lawfully sublet becomes under s, 20 a direct tenant of the landlord, It may be that when the sub-tenant of a room in a hotel becomes a direct tenant under cite19†s. 20 he enjoys the protection of the Act because the room is no, longer a room in a hotel. But that point does not arise and need not be decided. Because a room in a hotel is not (1) [1960] 1 S.C.R. 368.
L232: 556
L233: 
L234: premises, it does not follow that the room is not a part of the hotel premises or that a sub-letting of the room is not a contravention of cls. (b) and (c) of the proviso to s. 13(1).
L235: The Courts below concurrently found that the sub-lettings after the commencement of the Act were made without obtaining the consent of the landlord in writing, and the sub-lettings before the commencement of the Act were made without obtaining the consent of the landlord either orally or in writing. We are not inclined to interfere with this concurrent finding.
L236: It is said that by the lease deed dated August 18, 1939 the respondent impliedly consented to this sub-letting. Clauses 21 .and 22 of the lease are in these terms "21.
L237: That the lessee shall not be entitled to either transfer or sub-lease the premises or any part thereof to any other party without the written consent of the lessor and on such transfer, both the transferee and the lessee shall be liable for the payment of rent to the lessor and responsible to deliver,possession of the building and equipments in the same condition as when taken.
L238: 22.That the lessee will use the premises only for the purpose of running a first class hotel."
L239: It is -,aid that for the purpose of running a first class hotel it was necessary to sub-let the apartments. It is impossible to accept the contention. A hotel-keeper may run a first class hotel without sub-letting any part of it. Clause 21-clearly provided that the lessee shall not sub- lease the hotel premises or any part thereof. In the teeth of cl. 21, it is impossible to read in cl. 22 an implied consent to sub-letting.
L240: Reliance is placed on the correspondence passed between the Land Development Officer, New Delhi and the respondent bet- ween April 1948 and February 1949 for establishing that the respondent gave written consent to the sub-lettings. The Land and Development Officer was then complaining of the occupation of portions of the premises by Pan American World Airways and other persons.
L241: By his letters dated November 4, 1948 and February 23, 1949, the respondent requested the Land and Development Officer to regularise the matter adding that in an first class hotels counters of air-lines and show-rooms of jewellery and curios were always provided. These letter,.; do not amount to a consent in writing to sub-lettings of portions of the hotel to the persons mentioned therein. Moreover, the consent, if any, 'was to the sub-lettings made before 1949 and not to the sub- lettings made thereafter.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Helper Girdhiarbhai vs Saiyed Mohmad Mirasaheb Kadri And ... on 6 May, 1987 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1378557/)
citeturn147view1 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: last month; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1378557/","lineno":360}); Total lines: 435
L354: 906. This principle was reiterated in cite25†Krishnawati v. Hans Raj , [1974] 2 S.C.R. 524 which was dealing with cite26†section 39(2) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 in second appeal. It was observed that under cite27†section 39(2) of the said Act, the High Court could interfere in second appeal only if there was a substantial question of law. In that case, the question whether the appellant was legally married no find- ing was necessary in the eviction suit.
L355: It was sufficient for the rent court to proceed on the finding that the appel- lant and S were living together as husband and wife, whether they were legally married or not. It was further held that whether there was subletting was not a mixed question of law and fact. In cite28†Phiroze Bamanji Desai v. Chandrakant M.
L356: Patel & Ors. , [1974] 3 SCR 267 the question involved was whether there was reasonable and bona fide requirement of premises for personal use and occupation as also the question of greater hardship under the Bombay Rent Act and the ambit and scope of the power of cite29†Section 29(3) of the said Act with which we are concerned came up for consideration. Bhagwati, J. as the learned Chief Justice then was, referred with approval the observations of Hidayatullah, J.
L357: referred to hereinbefore in cite22†Hari Shankar 's case (supra). Bhagwati, J. observed that the ambit of cite30†section 35(1) of the Delhi & Ajmer Rent Control Act which fell for consideration in cite22†Hari Shanker 's case (supra) was the same as section 29(3) of the Bombay Rent Act and therefore, he expressed the opinion that the 303 High Court could interfere only if there was miscarriage of justice due to mistake of law.
L358: We must take note of a decision in the case of M/s cite31†Kasturbhai Ramchand Panchal & Brothers and Others v. Firm of Mohanlal Nathubhai and Others , AIR 1969 Gujarat 110, upon which the High Court had placed great reliance in the judg- ment under appeal. There the learned judge relying on sec- tion 29(2) of the said Act held that the revisional power with which the High Court was vested under cite13†section 29(2) was not merely in the nature of jurisdictional control.
L359: It extended to corrections of all errors which would make the decision contrary to law. The legislature, the learned Judge, felt, further empowered High Court in its revisional jurisdiction to pass such order with respect thereto as it thought fit. The power according to the learned Judge was of the widest amplitude to pass such orders as the Court thought fit in order to do complete justice.
L360: He dealt with the human problem under section 13(2) of Bombay Rent Act considering the relative hardships of the landlord and the tenant and to arrive at a just solution he was of the opin- ion that the court should have such wide field.
L361: The juris- diction of High Court is to correct all errors of law going to the root of the decision which would, in such cases, include even perverse findings of facts, perverse in the sense that no reasonable person, acting judicially and properly instructed in the relevant law could arrive at such a finding on the evidence on the record. In this view in our opinion the ambit of the power was expressed in rather wide amplitude.
L362: As we read the power, the High Court must ensure that the principles of law have been correctly borne in mind. Secondly, the facts have been properly appreciated and a decision arrived at taking all material and relevant facts in mind. It must be such a decision which no reasonable man could have arrived at. Lastly, such a decision does not lead to a miscarriage of justice.
L363: We must, however, guard our- selves against permitting in the guise of revision substitu- tion of one view where two views are possible and the Court of Small Causes has taken a particular view. If a possible view has been taken, the High Court would be exceeding its jurisdiction to substitute its own view with that the courts below because it considers it to be a better view. The fact that the High Court would have taken a different view is wholly irrelevant.
L364: Judged by that standard, we are of the opinion that the High Court in this case had exceeded its jurisdiction.
L365: In the case of Punamchandra Revashankar Joshi v. Ramjib- hai Maganlal, Gujarat Law Reporter (1966) at page 807, the Gujarat High Court after dealing with the Gujarat Amendment Act (XVIII) of 1965 304 observed that the Legislature has not intended to equate the ambit of the power with the one exercised in an appeal. The authority vested in the High Court under the amendment still remained only in the domain of the jurisdiction and power of revision and no further.
L366: The amending provision, therefore, only related to procedure and not to any rights of the parties.
L367: This Court in the case of Bhai Chand Ratanshi v. Laxmis- hanker Tribhavan, [1982] 1 Rent Control Journal 242 observed that where lower courts applied their minds properly in deciding a matter under section 13(2) of the Bombay Rent Act, the High Court could not substitute its own finding for the one reached by the courts below, on a reappraisal of evidence under cite13†section 29(2) of the Act as substituted by the cite32†Gujarat Act 18 of 1965.
L368: This Court reiterated that although the High Court had wider power than that which could be exercised under cite33†section 115 of C.P.C., yet its revisional power could only be exercised for a limited purpose with a view to satisfying itself that the decision was according to law. The High Court could not substitute its own finding for the one reached by the courts below on a reappraisal of evidence.
L369: In the instant case the basic question is whether keep- ing in background the partnership deeds referred to herein- before and the facts that came to light, was there partner- ship or not. Sharing of profits and contributing to losses were not the only elements in a partnership, existence of agency was essential and whether there was a partnership or not is a mixed question of law and fact, depending upon the varying circumstances in different cases.
L370: This view was reiterated by Chief Justice Beaumont, in cite34†Chimanram Motilal and another v. Jayantilal Chhaganlal and another , A.I.R. 1939 Bombay 410. Ramaswami, J. in cite35†Mohammed Musa Sahib (dead) and others v. N.K. Mohammed Ghouse Sahib and another , A.I.R. 1959 Madras 379 observed that whether the relation of part- nership between two or more persons does or does not exit must depend on the real intention and contract of the par- ties and not merely on their expressed intention.
L371: He also referred to cite19†section 4 of the Partnership Act about the principles of partnership namely, (1) there must be agree- ment entered into by all the persons concerned; (2) the agreement must be to share the profits of a business; and (3) the business must be carried on by all or any of the persons concerned acting for all. In the instant case judged by the aforesaid principles, it is possible to hold that there was a partnership of which the appellant was a part- ner.
L372: The Court of Small Causes considered these principles, evaluated the evidence and held that there was in fact and in law a partnership. Such a view was not an impossible one or a perverse one.
L373: 305
L374: If that was so, there was nothing that could be clone about such a view, within the ambit and scope of the power of cite16†section 29(2) of the Rent Act. We may mention that in Gunda- lapalli cite36†Rangamannar Chetty v. Desu Rangiah and others , A.I.R. 1954 Madras 182, Subba Rao, J. as the learned Chief Justice then was, held that there cannot be a subletting, unless the lessee parted with legal possession.
L375: The mere fact that another is allowed to use the premises while the lessee retains the legal possession is not enough to create a sub-lease.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Smt. Gian Devi Anand vs Jeeevan Kumar And Others on 1 May, 1985 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/)
citeturn147view2 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/","lineno":650}); Total lines: 743
L644: 14(1)(e)】 which makes bona fide requirement of the landlord of the premises let out to the tenant for residential purposes a ground for eviction of the tenant, is not made applicable to commercial premises. A tenant of any commercial premises has necessarily to use the premises for business purposes. Business carried on by a tenant of any commercial premises may be and often is, his only occupation and the source of livelihood of the tenant and his family.
L645: Out of the income earned by the tenant from his business in the commercial premises, the tenant maintains himself and his family; and the tenant, if he is residing in a tenanted house, may also be paying his rent out of the said income. Even if tenant is evicted from his residential premises, he may with the earnings out of the business be in a position to arrange for some other accommodation for his residence with his family.
L646: When, however, a tenant is thrown out of the commercial premises, his business which enables him to maintain himself and his family comes to a stand-still. It is common 35 knowledge that it is much more difficult to find suitable business premises than to find suitable premises for residence. It is no secret that for securing commercial accommodation, large sums of money by way of salami, even though not legally payable, may have to be paid and rents of commercial premises are usually very high.
L647: Besides, a business which has been carried on for years at a particular place has its own good will and other distinct advantages. The death of the person who happens to be the tenant of the commercial premises and who was running the business out of the income of which the family used to be maintained, is itself a great loss to the members of the family to whom the death, naturally, comes as a great blow.
L648: Usually, on the death of the person who runs the business and maintains his family out of the income of the business, the other members of the family who suffer the bereavement have necessarily to carry on the business for the maintenance and support of the family. A running business is indeed a very valuable asset and often a great source of comfort to the family as the business keeps the family going.
L649: So long as the contractual tenancy of a tenant who carries on the business continues, there can be no question of the heirs of the deceased tenant not only inheriting the tenancy but also inheriting the business and they are entitled to run and enjoy the same.
L650: We have earlier held that mere termination of the contractual tenancy does not bring about any change in the status of the tenant and the tenant by virtue of the definition of the `tenant' in the Act and the other Rent Acts continues to enjoy the same status and position unless there be any provisions in the Rent Acts which indicate to the contrary.
L651: The mere fact that in the Act no provision has been made with regard to the heirs of tenants in respect of commercial tenancies on the death of the tenant after termination of the tenancy, as has been done in the case of heirs of the tenants of residential premises, does not indicate that the Legislature intended that the heirs of the tenants of commercial premises will cease to enjoy the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act.
L652: The Legislature could never have possibly intended that with the death of a tenant of the commercial premises, the business carried on by the tenant, however flourishing it may be and even if the same constituted the source of livelihood of the members of the family, must necessarily come to an end on the death of the tenant, only because the tenant died after the contractual tenancy had been terminated.
L653: It could never have been the intention of the Legislature that the entire family of a tenant depending upon the 36 business carried on by the tenant will be completely stranded and the business carried on for years in the premises which had been let out to the tenant must stop functioning at the premises which the heirs of the deceased tenant must necessarily vacate, as they are afforded no protection under the Act.
L654: We are of the opinion that in case of commercial premises governed by the cite23†Delhi Act , the Legislature has not thought it fit in the light of the situation at Delhi to place any kind of restriction on the ordinary law of inheritance with regard to succession. It may also be borne in mind that in case of commercial premises the heirs of the deceased tenant not only succeed to the tenancy rights in the premises but they succeed to the business as a whole.
L655: It might have been open to the Legislature to limit or restrict the right of inheritance with regard to the tenancy as the Legislature had done in the case of the tenancies with regard to the residential houses but it would not have been open to the Legislature to alter under the cite24†Rent Act , the Law of Succession regarding the business which is a valuable heritable right and which must necessarily devolve on all the heirs in accordance with law.
L656: The absence of any provision restricting the heritability of the tenancy in respect of the commercial premises only establishes that commercial tenancies notwithstanding the determination of the contractual tenancies will devolve on the heirs in accordance with law and the heirs who step into the position of the deceased tenant will continue to enjoy the protection afforded by the Act and they can only be evicted in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
L657: There is another significant consideration which, in our opinion, lends support to the view that we are taking. Commercial premises are let out not only to individuals but also to Companies, Corporations and other statutory bodies having a juristic personality. In fact, tenancies in respect of commercial premises are usually taken by Companies and Corporations. When the tenant is a Company or a Corporation or anybody with juristic personality, question of the death of the tenant will not arise.
L658: Despite the termination of the tenancy, the Company or the Corporation or such juristic personalities, however, will go on enjoying the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act. It can hardly be conceived that the Legislature would intend to deny to one class of tenants, namely, individuals the protection which will be enjoyed by the other class' namely, the Corporations and Companies and other bodies with juristic personality under the Act.
L659: If it be held that commercial tenancies after the termination of the contractual tenancy of the 37 tenant are not heritable on the death of the tenant and the heirs of the tenant are not entitled to enjoy the protection under the Act, an irreparable mischief which the Legislature could never have intended is likely to be caused.
L660: Any time after the creation of the contractual tenancy, the landlord may determine the contractual tenancy, allowing the tenant to continue to remain in possession of the premises, hoping for an early death of the tenant, so that on the death of a tenant he can immediately proceed to institute the proceeding for recovery and recover possession of the premises as a matter of course, because the heirs would not have any right to remain in occupation and would not enjoy the protection of the Act.
L661: This could never have been intended by the Legislature while framing the Rent Acts for affording protection to the tenant against eviction that the landlord would be entitled to recover possession, even no grounds for eviction as prescribed in the Rent Acts are made out.
L662: In our opinion, the view expressed by this Court in Ganpat Ladha's case and the observations made therein which we have earlier quoted, do not lay down the correct law. The said decision does not properly construe the definition of the `tenant' as given in cite27†S. 5(11)(b) of the Act and does not consider the status of the tenant, as defined in the Act, even after termination of the commercial tenancy.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 14 in The Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/18143401/)
citeturn147view3 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/18143401/","lineno":0}); Total lines: 64
L0: # Indian Kanoon - Search engine for Indian Law
L1: 
L2: ## Search
L3: 
L4: Search Indian laws and judgments [Input: Search laws, court judgments and everything else ...] [Input]
L5: 
L6: ## Main Navigation
L7: 
L8: cite0†Free features L9: 
L10: Premium
L11: 
L12: cite1†Prism AI cite2†IKademy cite3†Pricing cite4†Login L13: 
L14: ## Mobile Navigation
L15: 
L16: cite0†Free features L17: 
L18: Premium
L19: 
L20: cite5†Premium features L21: 
L22: cite1†Prism AI cite2†IKademy cite3†Pricing cite4†Login L23: 
L24: ## Legal Document View
L25: 
L26: ### Tools for analyzing structure and cite text of judgments
L27: #### Document Options
L28: 
L29: [Input] [Input] [Button: Get in PDF]
L30: 
L31: [Input] [Input] [Button: Print it!]
L32: 
L33: [Cites cite6†0 , Cited by cite7†2753 ] [cite8†Entire Act ]
L34: 
L35: ### NCT Delhi - Section
L36: 
L37: ## Section 14 in The Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
L38: ### 14. Protection of tenant against eviction.
L39: cite9†(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract, no order or decree for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any court or Controller in favour of the landlord against a tenant:Provided that the Controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only, namely: -cite10†(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of the rent legally recoverable from him within two months of the date on which a notice of demand for the arrears of rent has been served of him by the landlord in the manner provided in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);cite11†(b) that the tenant has, on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, sub-let, assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord;cite12†(c) that the tenant has used the premises for a purpose other than that for which they were let -(i)if the premises have been let on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord; or(ii)if the premises have been let before the said date without obtaining his consent;cite13†(d) that the premises were let for use as a residence and neither the tenant nor any member of his family has been residing therein for a period of six months immediately before the date of the filing of the application for the recovery of possession thereof;[*] [[Section 14(1)(e) has been partially struck down by the Supreme Court in Satyawati Sharma (Dead) by Lrs.
L40: v. Union of India [Appeal (Civil) 1897 of 20031 on 16th April, 2008.
L41: It now reads as under:"that the premises are required bona fide by the landlord for himself or for any member of his family dependent on him, if he is the owner thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the premises are held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable accomodation."]] (e) that the premises let for residential purposes are required bona fide by the landlord for occupation as a residence for himself or for any member of his family dependent on him, if he is the owner thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the premises are held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation.Explanation.
L42: - For the purposes of this clause, "premises let for residential purposes" include any premises which having been let for use as a residence are, without the consent of the landlord, used incidentally for commercial or other purposes;cite14†(f) that the premises have become unsafe or unfit for human habitation and are required bona fide by the landlord for carrying out repairs which cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated;cite15†(g) that the premises are required bona fide by the landlord for the purpose of building or re-building or making thereto any substantial additions or alterations and that such building or re-building or addition or alteration cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated;cite16†(h) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, [***] [The word "built" omitted by Act 57 of 1988, section 8 (w.e.f.
L43: 1-12-1988).] , acquired vacant possession of, or been allotted, a residence;(hh)[ that the tenant has, after the commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988, built a residence and ten years have elapsed thereafter;] [Inserted by Act 57 of 1988, section 8 (w.e.f.
L44: 1-12-1988).]cite17†(i) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a residence by reason of his being in the service or employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has ceased, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, to be in such service or employment;cite18†(j) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, caused or permitted to be caused substantial damage to the premises;cite19†(k) that the tenant has, notwithstanding previous notice, used or dealt with the premises in a manner contrary to any condition imposed on the landlord by the Government or the Delhi Development Authority or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi while giving him a lease of the land on which the premises are situate;(1)that the landlord requires the premises in order to carry out any building work at the instance of the Government or the Delhi Development Authority or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is pursuance of any improvement scheme or development scheme and that such building work cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated.cite20†(2) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1) if the tenant makes payment or deposit as required by section 15:Provided that no tenant shall be entitled to the benefit under this sub-section, if, having obtained such benefit once in respect of any premises, he again makes a default in the payment of rent of those premises for three consecutive months.cite21†(3) No order for the recovery of possession in any proceeding under sub- section (1) shall be binding on any sub-tenant referred to in section 17 who has given notice of his sub-tenancy to the landlord under the provisions of that section, unless the sub-tenant is made a party to the proceeding and the order for eviction is made binding on him.cite22†(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), any premises which have been let for being used for the purposes of business or profession shall be deemed to have been sub-let by the tenant, if the Controller is satisfied that the tenant without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord has, after the 16th day of August, 1958, allowed any person to occupy the whole or any part of the premises ostensibly on the ground that such person is a partner of the tenant in the business or profession but really for the purpose of sub-letting such premises to that person.cite23†(5) No application for the recovery of possession of any premises shall lie under sub-section (1) on the ground specified in clause (c) of the proviso thereto, unless the landlord has given to the tenant a notice in the prescribed manner requiring him to stop the misuse of the premises and the tenant has refused or failed to comply with such requirement within one month of the date of service of the notice; and no order for eviction against the tenant shall be made in such a case, unless the Controller is satisfied that the misuse of the premises is of such a nature that it is a public nuisance or that it causes damage to the premises or is otherwise detrimental to the interest of the landlord.cite24†(6) Where a landlord has acquired any premises by transfer, no application for the recovery of possession of such premises shall lie under sub-section (1), on the ground specified in clause (e) of the proviso thereto, unless a period of five years have elapsed from the date of the acquisition.cite25†(7) Where an order for the recovery of possession of any premises is made on the ground specified in clause (e) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the landlord shall not be entitled to obtain possession thereof before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the order.cite26†(8) No order for the recovery or possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in clause (g) of the proviso to sub-section (1), unless the Controller is satisfied that the proposed reconstruction will not radically alter the purpose for which the premises were let or that such ramedical alteration is in the public interest, and that the plans and estimates of such reconstruction have been properly prepared and that necessary fund for the purpose are available with the landlord.cite27†(9) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in clause (i) of the proviso to sub-section (1), if the Controller is of opinion that there is any bona fide dispute as to whether the tenant has ceased to be in the service or employment of the landlord.cite28†(10) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in clause (j) of the proviso to sub-second (1) if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Controller, carries out repairs to the damage caused to the satisfaction of the Controller or pays to the landlord such amount by way of compensation as the Controller may direct.cite29†(11) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in clause (k) of the proviso to sub-section (1), if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Controller, complies with the condition imposed on the landlord by any of the authorities referred to in that clause or pays to that authority such amount by way of compensation as the Controller may direct.

