East India Hotels Ltd. vs Syndicate Bank on 12 September, 1991 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1144022/)
citeturn284view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1144022/","lineno":235}); Total lines: 307
L168: As stated in the pleadings and is clear from the documents filed in support thereof that the respondent claimed that it delivered possession to the appellants only to effect renovation and refurnishing of the suit premises with an undertaking to redeliver possession. They retained animus possedendie. It is clear from the fact that part of the furniture is still in part of the demised premises. It must be concluded that they have been dispossessed without their consent.
L169: 25. The crucial question is whether the respondent is entitled to recover possession under cite11†Section 6 of the Act. Shri Nariman contended that the appellant had terminated the licence by a notice and thereafter the possession of the Bank is that of a trespasser. At no point of time, after determination of the licence, the appellant acquiesced to the possession of the respondent. Therefore, its possession is not juridical.
L170: Unless the respondent remains and continues to remain in juridical and settled possession, the discretion under cite11†Section 6 would not he exercised in favour of such trespasser, in particular, as against the true owner. Respondent being an instrumentality of the state as a model person should not retain possession after the expiry of the period of licence.
L171: The judicial discretion given to the court under cite11†Section 6 must be exercised only in favour of the person in lawful possession on date of dispossession with proven right to retain possession as on the date of the suit. The respondent lost its right to specific performance of the contract of renewal in 1989, since the appellant had expressly refused in 1986 to renew licence. The respondent had no enforceable remedy for possession and it continued to remain a trespasser.
L172: 26. In support thereof he placed strong reliance on Amirudin v. Mohamad Jamal I.L.R. (15) Bombay 685; cite13†Lallu Yeshwant Singh v. Rao Jagdish Singh and Ors. ; cite20†Yar Muhammad and Anr. v. Lakshmi Das and Ors. ; cite21†Maganlal Radia v. State of Maharashtra 1970 (72) Bombay Law Reporter 734; cite15†D.H. Maniar and Ors. v. Waman Laxman Kudav ; cite22†Puran Singh Sahni v. Smt. Sundari Shagwandas Kriplani and Ors. ; Brigadier K.K. Verma and Anr. v. Naraindas C.
L173: Malkhani ILR 1954 Bombay 950; cite23†Neyveli Lignite Corpn. Ltd. and Ors. v. K.S. Narayana lyer ; cite24†Chandu Lal v. Municipal Corpn. of Delhi ; and cite25†Harshadkumar Sundarlal Dalal and Ors. v. Hasmukhben and Ors. 1983 (1) Gujarat Law Reporter 383.
L174: 27. The contention of Sri Nariman that dispossession by any means, fair or foul unless it is visited with breach of peace and is not amenable to exercise of power under cite11†Section 6 , would be fraught with insidious and pernicious effects on the efficacy of the rule of law as it germinates, generates or inculcates disbelief and apathy therein and drives the people to extra legal remedies.
L175: In my considered view, therefore, that possession obtained either by violence, misrepresentation, fraud, coercion, undue influence, seemingly innocuous but hidden with oblique motive or any other mode or method unlawful or otherwise except in due course of law attracts cite11†Section 6 . Law frowns upon such conduct. The court accords legitimacy and legality only to possession taken in due course of law.
L176: In cite11†Section 6 proceedings the consideration of the right, title or interest in immovable property either of the person claiming possession as an owner or under colour of title or person dispossessed or threatened to be dispossessed are irrelevant. It concerns itself whether the person was dispossessed without his consent and in due course of law and whether the suit was laid within six months from the date of the suit.
L177: The claim based on title or possessing title, after six months, would be gone into in a suit under cite18†Section 5 of the Act. Therein all relevant considerations would enter into the area of consideration.
L178: 28. cite26†Section 52 of the Indian Easements Act defines licence thus:
L179: 
L180: > Where one person grants to another, or to a definite number of other persons, a right to do, or continue to do, in or upon the immovable property of the grantor something which would, in the absence of such right, be unlawful, and such right does not amount to an easement or an interest in the property, the right is called a license.
L181: 29. It would be apparent from the definition that the permission by one person to another or a body of persons to do or continue to do upon an immovable property of the grantor is an authority or power to do one or series of acts, without which it is illegal or unlawful. The legal possession is always with the licensor and it does not create any interest or an estate in the licensee. A licensee is a person, who is neither a servant nor a "rank trespasser", but had come into possession with an authority.
L182: A rank trespasser is one who does not stand in any contractual relationship with the owner of the premises, A trespasser is also one who lawfully enters into but unlawfully remains in possession of the property without the consent or acquiescence of the owner.
L183: If one goes into possession of the property of another with invitation or permission for instance to a shop or cinema theater, or marriage hall to celebrate a marriage his initial entry is lawful but if he refuses to leave that place and unlawfully squats on it, he becomes a trespasser of a transient origin with no vestige of right. The initial entry into possession is obviously for short duration with a specified purpose.
L184: But if he enters upon the land under a contract and uses the land or premises and docs continuous business therein for well over a long period peacefully and uninterruptedly and continues to do the same even after the expiry or termination of licence, the important question arises whether he is a rank trespasser without any protection of law.
L185: 30. In cite27†Midnapur Zamindary Co. Ltd. v, Naresh Narayan Roy and Ors. 51 Indian Appeals 293 (P.C.), the Privy Council held that in India persons are not permitted to take forcible possession. They must obtain such possession as they are entitled to by proper course. In our jurisprudence governed by rule of law even an unauthorized occupant can be ejected only in the manner provided by law.
L186: The remedy under cite11†Section 6 is summary and its object is to prevent self help and to discourage people to adopt any means fair or foul to dispossess a person unless dispossession was in due course of law or with consent.
L187: 31. What is meant by due course of law? Due course of law in each particular case means such an exercise of the powers by duly constituted Tribunal or Court in accordance with the procedure established by law under such safeguards for the protection of individual rights. A course of legal proceedings according to the rules and principles which have been established in our system of jurisprudence for the enforcement and protection of private rights.
L188: To give such proceedings any validity, there must thus be a Tribunal competent by its constitution, that is bylaw of its creation, to pass upon the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding; and, if that involves merely a determination of the personal liability of the defendant, it must be brought within its jurisdiction by service of process within the state, or his voluntary appearance.
L189: Due course of law implies the right of the person affected thereby to be present before the Tribunal which pronounces judgment upon the question of life, liberty or property in its most comprehensive sense; to be heard, by testimony or otherwise, and to have the right of the controversy by proof, every material fact which bears on the question of fact or liability be conclusively proved or presumed against him. This is the meaning of due course of law in a comprehensive sense.
L190: 32. In Rudrappa v. Narsingrao (1905) I.L.R. 29 Bombay 213, a Division Bench consisting of Sir Jcnkins, Chief Justice, as he then was and Batchelor, J. held that the word "due course of law" in Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act (Old Act), as merely equivalent to the word 'legally' is, we think, to deprive them of a force and a significance which they carry on their very face. For a thing, which in perfectly legal, may still be by no means a thing done 'in due course of law'.
L191: To enable this phrase to be predicated of it, it is essential, speaking generally, that the thing should have been submitted to the consideration and pronouncement of the law, and the 'due course of law' means, we lake it, the regular normal process and effect of the law operating on a matter which has been laid before it for adjudication". In that case when the owner unilaterally dispossessed the tenant holding over the court upheld the decree for possession under cite14†Section 9 .
L192: The court further held that "this, in our opinion, is the primary and natural meaning of the phrase, <>in strict compliance of law though it may be applied in a derivative or secondary sense to other proceedings held under the direct authority of the law; in this sense it may be said, for instance, that revenue or taxes are collected in due course of law. A Full Bench of five Judges per majority of four in cite28†Tamizuddin v. Ashrub Ali ILR (31) Calcutta 647, Ghosh, J.
L193: (one of concurring Judges) held that when tenancy was not put an end to as the law requires, he remains upon the land as a tenant and necessarily if he is legal he is entitled to claim possession as a tenant. His possession is different from that of a person who enters into the land as a trespasser but if he is evicted illegally, he is entitled to put back in possession according to provision of cite14†Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act though he has no title to the land.
L194: It is to be noted that the case relates to the tenant who is entitled to remain in possession as tenant holding over after the expiry of his lease but the ratio is significant that on expiry of the lease or licence no one can take possession unilaterally except in due course of law, though the respondent had no legal title. In cite29†Jeewanmal and Ors. v. Dr.
L195: Dharamchand Khatri and Ors. , the court discountenanced the incompetent Mandi Development Officer taking over possession of the land from the petitioners. Even the modicum of procedure followed by the Board to take possession was held to be "not in regular normal process". In cite23†Neyveli Lignite Corporation 's case (supra), the respondent, a tenant holding over who was given on lease to run a canteen, on expiry of the lease, did not vacate it, though asked for.
L196: The security officer with the assistance of the police made an inventory of the articles and kept the furniture in a room therein and had taken possession. Though he was present, the tenant did not object to taking possession but later on issued a legal notice claiming damages from the Corporation. Thereafter the lock was removed and the goods were thrown out and the respondent filed a suit under cite14†Section 9 of the old Act.
L197: In that factual background the Division Bench held that the law recognises right to possession as a substantive right or interest which exist as certain legal incidence attached to it and it recognised such an advantage. As the respondent did not claim possession in the legal notice but merely claimed damages from that contract, it was inferred that he had no intention to retain possession. Accordingly the decree for possession was set aside.
L198: Far from helping the appellant this decision supports the view that even a landlord under colour of title cannot dispossess the person in occupation except in due course of law. If the person dispossessed expresses animus possedendie he is entitled to the relief under cite11†Section 6 . In cite30†Anoopchand Revishanker Mehta v. Amerchand AIR 1951 Mysore 101, possession taken even in execution but not by a competent officer was held to be not in a due course of law.
L199: 33. It is thus clear that the courts have viewed with askance any process other than strict compliance of law as valid in dispossessing a person in occupation of immovable property against his consent.
L200: The reason is obvious that it aims to preserve the efficacy of law and peace and order in the society relegating the jurisprudential perspectives to a suit under cite18†Section 5 of the Act and restitute possession to the person dispossessed, irrespective of the fact whether he has any title to possession or not.
L201: 34. Unlike a tenant, the legal incidence of licence in normal parlance is that licensee has no right to possession of the demised property as the legal possession always remains with the licensor. It creates neither interest nor estate therein.
L202: After the expiry of the period of licence or termination thereof, the continuance in possession of the premises by the licensee would be as a trespasser unless the covenant in a contract under which he/they came into possession creates such a right or acquiesced by the licensor. His possession, therefore, would not be juridical.
L203: 35. In cite15†D.H. Maniar and Ors. v. Waman Laxman Kudav considered the effect of cite31†Section 15A of Bombay Rents Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 of the person whose licence had been revoked whether he is entitled to the protection of Section 15A thereof. The leave and licence granted to the respondent on March 31, 1966 was terminated but he remained in possession.
L204: In the eviction proceedings, rejecting the plea that he was a tenant, a decree for ejectment was passed which was challenged in the proceedings under cite32†Article 226; pending the proceedings in the High Court Section 15A was brought on statute conferring on existing licensee the status of a tenant under that Act. It was contended by the respondent that he was entitled to the protection of Section 15A to remain in possession.
L205: On those facts, this Court held that the licensee under a subsisting agreement of licence, alone is entitled to the protection of Section 15A as a tenant to continue in possession of the premises. After termination, withdrawing or determination of the licence, if he continues to occupy it as a trespasser or a person who has no right to continue occupation of the premises, such a person cannot be called a licensee at all.
L206: It is clear from the factual scenario that this Court did not consider the scope of cite11†Section 6 of the Act and the nature of possession of a licensee after termination. In cite33†Saut Lal Jain v. Avtar Singh , this Court held at p. 189A that the principle that once a licensee always a licensee would apply to all kinds of licences and that it cannot be said that the moment the licence is terminated, the licensee's possession becomes that of a trespasser.
L207: This Court approved the ratio in Milkha Singh and Ors. v. Diana and Ors. AIR 1964 J. & K. 99, wherein Murtaza Fazal Ali, J., as he then was, speaking for the Division Bench of that court, held that after the termination of licence, the licensee is under a clear obligation to surrender his possession and if he fails to do so mandatory injunction could be granted to compel performance of the obligation to deliver possession.
L208: In that context, it was held that the possession of the licensee after termination is not that of a trespasser.
L209: 36. It is seen that there is a covenant in the contract for renewal for further 12 years. There is an acute controversy whether it is a licence or lease which needs to be decided in the regular suit laid by the appellant. Suffice to stale that in exercise of the clause the respondent claimed to remain in possession till the fire broke out. With a view to enable the appellants to have the repairs, renovation and refurnishing effected the possession was surrendered.
L210: Therefore, though the possession of the respondent after the expiry of the contract of licence or termination, even assuming to be that of a trespasser, whether the Bank is liable to be dispossessed otherwise than in due course of law?
L211: 37. This Court had occasion to consider the concept of settled possession and the right of a trespasser to repel an owner when there is a threat to his possession.
L212: 38. In Munshi Ram and Ors. v. Delhi Admn. , 'A' purchased at a public auction certain evacuee property and provisional delivery was given to him on October 10, 1961 followed by issue of sale certificate on February 8, 1962 and delivery on a warrant issued by the Managing Officer of the department on June 22, 1962. On July 1, 1962, 'A' accompanied by his party, went to the land with a tractor to level the land.
L213: The complainant party resisted the action asserting that they were continuing in possession for over thirty years and the tenancy was never terminated.
L214: A bench of three Judges considering the right of private defence to a trespasser held that "it is true that no one including the true owner has a right to dispossess the trespasser by force if the trespasser is in settled possession of the land and in such a case unless he is evicted in due course of law, he is entitled to defend his possession even against the rightful owner. But stray or even intermittent acts of trespass do not give such a right against the true owner.
L215: The possession which a trespasser is entitled to defend against the rightful owner must be a settled possession extending over a sufficiently long period, and acquiesced in by the trueowner. A casual act of possession would not have the effect of interrupting the possession of the rightful owner. The rightful owner may re-enter and reinstate himself provided he docs not use more force than was necessary. Such entry will be viewed as a resistance to an intrusion upon possession which has never been lost.
L216: The person in possession by a stray act of trespass, a possession which has not matured into settled possession, constitute an unlawful assembly, giving right to the true owner, though not in actual possession at the time, to remove the obstruction even by using necessary force". In cite34†Puran Singh v. State of Punjab (1975)Suppl.
L217: SCR 299, while following the ratio in Munshi Ram's case, this Court held that it is difficult to lay clown any hard and fast rule as to when the possession of a trespasser can mature into settled possession. But what this Court really meant was that the possession of a trespasser must be effective, undisturbed and to the knowledge of the owner or without any attempt at concealment.
L218: There is no special charm or magic in the words "settled possession" nor is it a ritualistic formula which can be confined in a straight jacket but it has been used to mean such clear and effective possession of a person, even if he is a trespasser, who gets the right under the criminal law to defend his properly against attack even by the true owner.
L219: It would be reiterated that the possession must be within the knowledge either express or implied, of the owner or without any attempt at concealment and which contains an element of animus possedendic. In that case possession for 14 days was held to be settled possession since they raised the crops in the land. This view was reiterated again in cite35†Ram Ratan v.
L220: State of U.P. (1977)2 SCR 2323, laying therein that the true owner has every right to dispossess or throw out a trespasser while he is in the act or process of trespassing but this right is not available to the true owner if the trespasser has been successful in accomplishing his possession to the knowledge of the true owner. In such circumstances the law requires that the true owner should dispossess the trespasser by taking recourse to the remedies under the law.
L221: 39. This court thus firmly laid the rule that stray or intermittent acts of possession does not constitute settled possession. A person in settled possession is entitled to resist the attempt of even the owner or persons claiming under him to dispossess the trespasser. The only exception was that a recent or concealed possession does not enable a trespasser to defend his possession. The landlord is entitled to use reasonable force only to the attempted or intermittent acts or attempts to take possession.
L222: The trespasser in settled possession is to be ejected in due course of law. cite13†Lallu Yeshwant Singh v. Rao Jagdish Singh and Ors , is an authority for proposition that a tenant holding over cannot be dispossessed without following due course of law. In a suit under revenue code like cite14†Section 9 of the old Act, this Court held that the question of title under cite14†Section 9 is irrelevant. The word trespass would include forcible entry.
L223: Unilateral dispossession of a tenant holding over for nonpayment of rent by the landlord was held unlawful and upheld the decree for possession. The ratio cite13†laid down by Chagla, C.I. in K.K. Verma and Anr. v. Naraindas C. Malkani I.L.R. 1954 Bombay 950 at 957, was also to the same effect. The facts were that the respondent Naraindas was put in possession of a flat by the Ministry of Defence as a displaced person on monthly tenancy. A notice to vacate the premises was given by the Union but was resisted.
L224: The possession was taken under the provisions of Act 26 of 1950 which provided summary remedy for ejectment as an "unauthorized occupant". The question therein was whether the respondent was an unauthorized occupant. Chagla, C.J. speaking for the Division Bench, held that a trespasser is one who had come into occupation of the government premises without any authority or contract and to him remedy under cite14†Section 9 was not available.
L225: But the respondent having had possession legally and after determination of the tenancy, he was tenant holding over his possession was held to be juridical. Chief Justice Chagla in those circumstances held, on which Shri Nariman placed strong reliance, that a trespasser who has been thrown out of possession cannot get into possession under cite14†Section 9 which question vis-a-vis the licensee did not arise for consideration therein.
L226: In cite13†Lallu Yeshwant 's case, though approved the ratio of Verma's case the precise question in issue also did not crop up for adjudication. This Court yet did not approve of the conduct of the landlord of self help to dispossess the tenant holding over without due course of law.
L227: 41. In cite36†M.C. Chockalingam and Ors. v. Manickavasagam and Ors. , this Court held that lawful possession in the context of Rule 13 of Madras Cinemas (Regulations) Act, 1955 would mean only juridical that is protected by law such as cite14†Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act and that, therefore, the possession of the respondent therein was held to be lawful possession.
L228: 42. In cite37†K.K. Firm v. The Govt. of A.P. and Ors. this Court held that the remedy of cite11†Section 6 of the Act is founded on expediency rather than jurisprudence and the tenant holding over has juridical possession and not in unlawful possession. The possession of such a person though not legal yet not without interest.
L229: 43. In cite38†Nair Service Society Ltd. v. Rev. Father K.C. Alexander and Ors. (1963) 3 SCR 163, this Court held that the plaintiff need not prove title and the title of the defendant does not avail him. Even a suit by a trespasser was held to be maintainable under cite14†Section 9 of the old Act. It was also further held that the relief cannot be denied on the ground that he was an offender liable to penalty under the Act.
L230: 44. In M.C. Batra v. Laxmi Insurance Co. Ltd. AIR 1965 Allahabad 709, the tenant had inducted the petitioner as a subtenant. The respondent had unilaterally dispossessed the petitioner who claimed protection under cite14†Section 9 for redelivery of possession. The Division Bench held that the object of cite14†Section 9 is to discourage people from taking law into their own hands, however, good their title may be.
L231: cite14†Section 9 says nothing about the nature of the possession enjoyed by the person dispossessed, although it may well be that a suit under cite14†Section 9 cannot be maintained by a person who is manifestly a trespasser and whose possession is of a very short duration.
L232: Save in those cases where the nature of the possession of the plaintiff is clearly such as to result in proceeding under s, 9 defeating the purpose of that section, the title of the plaintiff is no more to be inquired into than that of the defendant. It was held that he is entitled to restitution until he is duly ejected in accordance with law. This view was approved in cite20†Yar Muhammad 's case whose ratio was approved by this Court in cite13†Lallu Yeshwant Singh 's case.
L233: In cite20†Yar Muhammad 's case it was held that possession is prima facie title and if a person who is in possession is dispossessed, he has a right to possession from the person who dispossessed him, even if he is unable to prove title. A suit under cite14†Section 9 is entirely different from the suit based on title for possession.
L234: A person dispossessed is entitled to succeed simply by showing (1) that he is in possession; (2) he has been dispossessed by the defendant; (3) that dispossession is not in accordance with law and (4) that dispossession took place within six months of the suit. No question of the title either of the plaintiff or defendant can be raised or gone into cite20†in that case . Far from helping the appellant the ratio in cite20†Yar Muhammad 's case goes against it. In Ayodhiya Prasad Belihar Sao and Anr. v.
L235: Ghasiram Premsai Nai AIR 1938 Nagpur 326, the plaintiff/petitioner was inducted into possession under an unregistered sale-deed and remained in possession for four years, was held to be "in excusable possession" and the decree under cite14†Section 9 of the old Act was directed to be made. It was further held that possession required under cite14†Section 9 cannot mean merely possession under a valid title; it must include possession that is at least excusable. In cite39†Shri Praful Nyalchand Sanghajka v. Dr.
L236: Prakash V. Pradhan of Bombay and Ors. , the doctors were given leave and licence to use cabins for medical practice. Though they had no exclusive possession, when they were sought to be dispossessed unlawfully, in their suit the Bombay High Court held that "plaintiffs entry into the cabins were lawful and are in settled possession". The threat of dispossession would give them cause of action to lay the suit under cite11†Section 6 and the injunction was accordingly granted.
L237: In cite40†Krishna Ram Mahate (dead) by L.Rs. v, Mrs. Shobha Venkat Rao JT 1989 (3) SC 489 : (1989)4 SCC 131, the facts were that the respondent was inducted into' possession under an agreement to conduct business in a restaurant. On an attempted issue of notice of terminating the agreement, the respondent was dispossessed surreptitiously and a suit was laid by her for an order of injunction and for restoration of possession under cite11†Section 6 of the Act which was granted.
L238: The appeal was filed to this Court by the defendant/appellant. While deprecating the conduct of the owner, following the ratio in Lallu Yeshwant Singh and Ram Ratan's cases this court held that the occupant in possession cannot be dispossessed without recourse to law.
L239: When attempted to argue that by the date of the hearing" of the appeal the period of licence had expired, this Court discountenanced the contention and directed a receiver to lake over possession and the respondent was directed to be given possession of the restaurant.
L240: 45. Law respects possession even if there is no title to support it. No-one is permitted to take law in one's own hands and to dispossess the person in actual settled possession without due course of law. No person can be allowed to become a judge in his own case. The object of cite11†Section 6 is to discourage people to act in self help, however, good their title may be.
L241: The licensee in possession for well over 15 years is in settled possession and is entitled to remain in possession and make use of the premises for the purpose for which it was demised until it is ejected in due course of law. The acquiescence of the landlord in this context would be to the initial unlawful entry into possession and continuation thereafter but not to the continuance in possession of the licencee after the expiry or termination of the licence.
L242: That was what this court appears to have meant in the previous decisions. Take for instance that when a licence was granted for a couple of years and after its expiry, by efflux of time, or on termination, if the possession of the licensee, though unlawful and unjust is not protected, the aggressor or mighty would trample upon the rights of the weak and meek and denial of relief under cite11†Section 6 would put a premium upon the aggression or treachery or tricks.
L243: No doubt long delay in disposal of cases due to docket explosion became a ruse to unscrupulous litigant to abuse the due course of law to protract litigation and remain in unjust or wrongful possession of the property. Landlord could be suitably compensated by award of damages. It cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be said that a person in settled possession, though unlawful, is not entitled to the protection under cite11†Section 6 of the Act.
L244: Maintenance of law and order, and enthusing confidence in the efficacy of rule of law are condition precedent for orderly society. Therefore, giving primacy, legitimacy or legality to the conduct or acts of the landlord to take possession of the property in derogation of the due course of law would be deleterious to rule of law and a pat on high-handedness or self-help.
L245: 46. In Amirudin's case the facts were that Amirudin, plaintiff filed the suit to recover a room from the defendant when he was dispossessed on June 3, 1890. The defendant pleaded that he had been in possession and that the plaintiff trespassed into it by excluding him from the room and put a padlock on the door. He had removed the padlock and resumed possession.
L246: The plea, therefore, was that the plaintiff was a rank trespasser and the defendant resumed possession in his assertion as an owner, and as such, the plaintiff was not entitled to relief under cite14†Section 9 of the old Act. The trial court accepted that plea and held that the plaintiff was a trespasser. Under those circumstances, the court held that he was not entitled to possession. That ratio has no application to the facts.
L247: In cite24†Chandu Lal 's, case no doubt the ratio therein is in favour of the appellant. But it is difficult to approve of it. The licensee in settled possession is entitled to the remedy under cite11†Section 6 . But each case has to be considered in the light of its own facts.
L248: 47. In cite21†Maganlal Radia 's case the Bombay High Court held that a licensee whose licence has been terminated, even though he may have actual possession of the properly, is not protected by law to avail himself of the remedy of cite11†Section 6 . In that case he was evicted by a summary procedure, i.e. in due course of law. So the remedy under cite11†Section 6 was not available.
L249: That was not a suit under cite11†Section 6 but a Writ Petition under cite32†Article 226. This ratio renders little assistance to the appellant. In cite25†Harshad kumar Sunderlal Dalai 's case the facts were that access to the room to the licensee was only through the court yard of the landlord. On termination of the licence the landlord closed the door from inside and did not allow the petitioner to get into possession.
L250: When a suit under cite14†Section 9 was laid for possession, it was held that a trespasser thrown out from possession cannot claim possession against the true owner under cite14†Section 9 of the old Act. For the aforesaid reasons, the ratio is not good law.
L251: 48. In cite22†Puran Singh Sahni 's case the question therein was the distinction between licence and lease vis-a-vis the power of the Tribunal under cite41†Section 91 of the Co-op. Societies Act. It is also of no avail to the appellant. Thus I hold that the respondent, after expiry of the licence or its termination, was in settled possession, and its dispossession was otherwise than in due course of law. Therefore, the decree for possession under cite11†Section 6 of the Act is not illegal.
L252: Remedy of judicial review under cite17†Article 136 of the Constitution is plenary and is not hedged with the bar of appeal or review prescribed by cite11†Section 6 of the Act. The contention of the counsel for the respondent that this court would not review the decision of the High Court is ex facie desperate and is rejected.
L253: 49. The appeal is accordingly dismissed but without costs.
L254: 
L255: ORDER
L256: 
L257: 50. In view of the conflicting judgments given by us, the matter may now be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India for constituting a larger bench for resolving the conflict.
L258: ### Related AI tags, queries and research notes
L259: 
L260: #### Translation
L261: #### Related user Queries
L262: 
L263:   * cite42†settled possession L264: 
L265:   * cite43†trespasser no right L266: 
L267:   * cite44†trespass is not possession L268: 
L269:   * cite45†title and possession L270: 
L271:   * cite46†vis major L272: 
L273:   * cite47†suit for possession L274: 
L275:   * cite48†specific relief act L276: 
L277:   * cite49†tenant holding over L278: 
L279:   * cite50†legal possession L280: 
L281:   * cite51†rank trespasser L282: 
L283:   * cite52†juridical possession L284: 
L285:   * cite53†what is lawful possession L286: 
L287:   * cite54†acquiescence L288: 
L289:   * cite55†rule of law L290: 
L291:   * cite56†leave and licence L292: 
L293:   * cite57†jurisprudence L294:   * cite58†trespasser and possession L295: 
L296:   * cite59†true owner L297: 
L298:   * cite60†title suits L299: 
L300:   * cite61†once a licensee always a licensee L301: 
L302: cite62†About cite63†Disclaimer cite64†Privacy Policy cite65†Terms cite66†Case Removal cite67†Blog†blog.indiankanoon.org [Button: Share URL]
L303: 
L304: [Input] [Button: Mobile View]
L305: 
L306: cite68†⚖ Case Recast AI 
