JSON
{
  "case_id": "869439",
  "rejections": [
    {
      "id": "n3",
      "reason": "The need overstates Clause 14 as giving 'written permission' for M/s R.C. Abrol & Co. to share the premises. Clause 14 separately requires written permission for subletting, but its sharing clause states only that the contractors 'will share the premises with the permission of the lessor.' The supplied text does not establish that the sharing permission itself was written consent.",
      "refs": [
        "IK-869439:L171"
      ]
    }
  ],
  "omissions": [
    "The supplied case segments do not state when the alleged subletting, assignment, or parting with possession occurred, so the 9 June 1952 threshold and Act-commencement timing cannot be resolved.",
    "The supplied record does not provide the underlying evidence showing the actual physical or legal possession arrangement involving R.C. Abrol.",
    "The supplied record does not establish whether R.C. Abrol & Company Pvt. Ltd. and M/s R.C. Abrol & Co. are the same legal entity.",
    "The supplied record does not establish whether the lessor's permission for M/s R.C. Abrol & Co. to share the premises constituted written consent to any alleged subletting, assignment, or parting with possession, or the exact scope of that permission.",
    "The detailed reasoning underlying the Rent Control Tribunal and High Court findings is not supplied.",
    "The target Supreme Court's final reasoning and outcome are withheld and cannot be supplied or inferred."
  ],
  "limits": [
    "Review is confined to the supplied allowed record and supplied law units; no external sources, other conversations, or withheld judgment material were used.",
    "Lower-court findings are preserved only as prior findings and are not converted into target-court findings.",
    "The Delhi statutory reproductions carry the supplied historical-version and authentication caveats.",
    "LAW:V21:GR:REPORTED_DELHI reports Parasaram through another Supreme Court judgment and is not an independently supplied full Parasaram opinion.",
    "No supplied target-case fact shows liquidation, amalgamation, statutory acquisition, banking reorganization, RBI sanction, Central Government scheme, or statutory vesting; precedent facts involving those mechanisms are not imported into this case."
  ]
}