Smt. Gian Devi Anand vs Jeeevan Kumar And Others on 1 May, 1985 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/)
citeturn247view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/","lineno":492}); Total lines: 743
L461: > Against the order of the Rent Control Tribunal, Smt. Gian Devi Anand, the widow of the deceased tenant, filed an appeal in the High Court impleading in the said appeal the other heirs of Wasti Ram as pro-forma respondents. The landlord also filed a cross-objection in the High Court after the widow had presented the appeal against the order of the Rent Control Tribunal directing remand on the question of sub-letting.
L462: In the cross-objection filed by the landlord, the landlord had challenged the finding of the Tribunal on the question of non-payment of rent and had further raised a contention that view of the death of the original tenant Wasti Ram, who continued to remain in possession of the shop as a statutory tenant, the widow and the heirs of the deceased tenant were not entitled to continue to remain in occupation thereof.
L463: The High Court held that on the death of the statutory tenant, the heirs 12 of the statutory tenant had no right to remain in possession of the premises, as statutory tenancy was not heritable and the protection afforded to a statutory tenant by the Act is not available to the heirs and legal representatives of the statutory tenant.
L464: In this view of the matter the High Court did not consider it necessary to go into other questions and the High Court allowed the cross-objection filed by the landlord and passed a decree for eviction against the appellant and the other heirs of Wasti Ram, the deceased tenant.
L465: > The correctness of this view that on the death of a tenant whose tenancy in respect of any commercial premises has been terminated during this life time, whether before the commencement of any eviction proceeding against him or during the pendency of any eviction proceeding against him, the heirs of the deceased tenant do not enjoy the protection afforded by the Act to the tenant and they do not have any right to continue to remain in possession because they do not inherit the tenancy rights of the deceased tenant, is challenged in this appeal.
L466: > The learned counsel for the appellant-tenant argues that there could be no doubt that a contractual tenancy is heritable and he contends that notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy of the tenant in respect of any commercial premises, the position in law remains unchanged in so far as the tenancy in respect of commercial premises is concerned, the virtue of the provisions of the Act.
L467: In support of this contention reference is made to the provisions of the Act and strong reliance is placed on the decision of this court in the case of Damadi Lal & Ors. v. Parashram & Ors.(1) and also to the decision of this Court in the case of cite29†V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal .(2).
L468: > The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the landlord-respondents have submitted that on the determination of the contractual tenancy, the tenancy comes to an end and the tenant ceases to have any estate or interest in the premises.
L469: It is contended that on determination of the tenancy, the tenant becomes liable to be evicted in due process of law under the general law of the land; but, the Act affords a protection to the tenant against such evictiod in as the Act provides that inspite of the termination of 13 the tenancy, no order or decree for procession shall be passed against the tenant, unless any of the grounds mentioned in the Act which entitles a landlord to recover possession of the premises from the tenant is established.
L470: It is contended that the protection to the tenant under the Act is against eviction except on grounds recognised by the Act and the protection is only in the nature of personal protection to the tenant who continues to remain in possession after the termination of the tenancy.
L471: The contention is that the tenant loses the estate or interest in the tenanted premises after termination of the contractual tenancy and the tenant by virtue of the Act is afforded only a personal protection against eviction; and, therefore, the heirs of such tenant on his death acquire no interest or estate in the premises, because the deceased tenant had none, and they can also claim no protection against eviction, as the protection under the Act is personal to the tenant as long as the tenant continues to remain in possession of the premises after the termination of the tenancy.
L472: The argument, in short, is that the protection against eviction after termination of tenancy afforded to a tenant by the Act creates a personal right in favour of the tenant who continues to remain in possession after termination of his tenancy without any estate or interest in the premises; and, therefore, on the death of such a tenant, his heirs who have neither any estate nor interest in the tenanted premises and who do not have any protection under the Act against eviction, are liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary Law of the land.
L473: In support of this argument various authorities including decisions of this Court, of various High Courts, of English Courts and also passages from Halsburys" Laws of England and other eminent English authors have been cited.
L474: > It has been further argued that in view of the clear provision in law that heirs of a deceased tenant whose tenancy had been terminated during his life time and who was continuing in possession by virtue of the provisions of the Act did not enjoy any protection and was liable to be evicted as a matter of course, the Legislature considered it fit to intervene to give some relief to the heirs of the deceased tenant in respect of the residential premises and amended the Act of 1958 by Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Act 18 of 1976) by changing the definition of 'tenant' with retrospective effect.
L475: The argument is that by virtue of the amendment introduced in 1976 with retrospective effect, the heirs of the deceased tenant specified in s. 2 (iii) enjoy the protection against eviction 14 during their life time in the manner mentioned therein, provided the conditions mentioned therein are satisfied, only with regard to residential premises.
L476: It is contended that with regard to the residential premises such limited protection essentially personal to the heirs specified and to be enjoyed by them for their lives in the manner cite29†laid down in the said sub-cite26†section 2 (1) (iii) has been provided by the amendment; but in respect of commercial premises no such protection has been given.
L477: > We do not consider it necessary to refer to the various English cases and the other English authorities cited from the Bar. The English cases and the other authorities turn on the provisions of the English Rent Acts. The provisions of the English Rent Acts are not in pari materia with the provisions of the Act in question or the other Rent Acts prevailing in other States in India.
L478: The English Rent Acts which have come into existence from time to time were no doubt introduced for the benefit of the tenants. It may be noted that the term "statutory tenant" which is not to be found in the Act in question or in the other analogous Rent Acts in force in other States in India, is indeed a creature of the cite16†English Rent Act .
L479: cite16†English Rent Act 1977 which was enacted to consolidate the cite24†Rent Act 1968, parts III, IV and VIII of the Housing Finance Act, 1972, the cite24†Rent Act 1974, sections 7 to 10 of the Housing Rents and Subsidies Act 1975 and certain related enactments, with amendments to give effect to recommendation of the Law Commission, speaks of protected tenants and tenancies in cite32†S.1 and defines statutory tenant in S.
L480: 2, English Rent Act, 1977 is in the nature of a complete Code governing the rights and obligations of the landlord and the tenant and their relationship in respect of tenancies covered by the Act.
L481: As the provisions of the cite16†English Act are materially different from the provisions of the Act in question and other Rent Control Acts in force in other States in India, the decisions of the English Courts and the passages from the various authoritative books including the passages from Halsbury which are all concerned with English Rent Acts are not of any particular assistance in deciding the question involved in this appeal.
L482: As we have already noticed, the term 'statutory tenant' is used in cite16†English Rent Act and though this term is not be found in the Indian Acts, in the Judgments of this Court and also of the various High Courts in India, this term has often been used to denote a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been terminated but who has become entitled to continue to remain in possession by virtue of the protection afforded to him by the statutes in question, 15 namely, the various Rent Control Acts, prevailing in different States of India.
L483: It is also important to note that notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Landlord, the tenant is afforded protection against eviction and is permitted to continue to remain in possession even after the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Act in question and invariably by all the Rent Acts in force in various States so long as an order or decree for evictions against the tenant on any of the grounds specified in such Acts on the basis of which an order or decree for eviction against the tenant can be passed, is not passed.
L484: > As various decisions of this Court on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the Landlord have been cited, it does not become very necessary to consider at any length the various decisions of the High Courts on the very same question, relied on by the Learned Counsel for the landlords.
L485: It may, however, be noted that the decisions of this Court to which we shall refer in due course and the decisions of the High Courts which were cited by the learned counsel for the Landlords do lend support to their contention.
L486: > We first propose to deal with the decision of his Court in Damadilal's case (supra) in which this Court considered some of the English Authorities and also some of the decisions of this Court. In this case the first question raised on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant in this Court was whether the heirs of the statutory tenants had any heritable interest in the demised premises and had the right to prosecute the appeal in the High Court on the death of the statutory tenant.
L487: > Dealing with this contention the Court held at pages 650 to 654:
L488: > "In support of his first contention Mr. Gupta relied on two decisions of this Court, cite33†Anand Nivas (Private) Ltd. v. Anandji Kalyanji Pedhi & Ors (cite34†1) and Jagdish Chander Chatteriee & Ors. v. Sri Kishan & Anr. (2). The statute considered in Anand Nivas(1) case was cite35†Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended in 1959. The question there was, whether a tenant whose tenancy had been terminated had any right 16 to sublet the premises.
L489: Of the three learned Judges composing the Bench that heard the appeal, Hidayatullah and Shah, JJ. held that a statutory tenant, meaning a tenant whose tenancy has determined but who continues in possession, has no power of subletting. Sarkar J. delivered a dissenting opinion. Shah J. who spoke for himself and Hidayatullah J. observed in the course of their judgment:
L490: > 'A statutory tenant has no interest in the premises occupied by him, and he has no estate to assign or transfer. A statutory tenant is, as we have already observed, a person who on determination of his contractual right, is permitted to remain in occupation so long as he observes and performs the conditions of the tenancy and pays the standard rent and permitted increases.
L491: His personal right of occupation is incapable of being transferred or assigned, and he having no interest in the property there is no estate on which subletting may operate.' It appears from the judgment of Shah, J. that 'the cite36†Bombay Act merely grants conditional protection to a statutory tenant and does not invest him with the right to enforce the benefit of any of the terms and conditions the original tenancy'. Sarkar, J.
L492: dissenting held that word 'tenant' as defined in the Act included both a contractual tenant-a tenant whose lease is subsisting as also a statutory tenant and the latter has the same power to sublet as the former. According to Sarkar, J. even if a statutory tenant had no estate or property in the demised premises, the Act had undoubtedly created a right in such a tenant in respect of the property which he could transfer.
L493: cite34†Jagdish Chander Chatterjee 's case dealt with the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950, and the question for decision was whether on the death of a statutory tenant his heirs succeed to the tenancy so as to claim protection of the Act.
L494: In this case it was held by Grover and Palekar JJ., relying on cite33†Anand Nivas 's case, that after the termination of contractual tenancy, a statutory tenant enjoys only a personal right to continue in possession and on his death 17 his heirs do not inherit any estate or interest in the original tenancy.
L495: > Both these cases, Anand Nivas and Jagdish Chander Chatterjee, proceed on the basis that a tenant whose tenancy has been terminated, described as statutory tenant, has no estate or interest in the premises but only a personal right to remain in occupation. It would seem as if there is a distinct category of tenants called statutory tenants having separate and fixed incidents of tenancy. The term 'statutory tenancy' is borrowed from the English Rent Acts.
L496: This may be a convenient expression for referring to a tenant whose tenancy has been terminated and who would be liable to be evicted but for the protecting statute, but courts in this country have sometimes borrowed along with the expression certain notions regarding such tenancy from the decisions of the English Courts. In our opinion it has to be ascertained how far these notions are reconcilable with the provisions of the statute under consideration in any particular case.
L497: The expression 'statutory tenancy' was used in England in several judgments under the Increase of Rent and Mortgage interest (War Restrictions) Act, 1915, to refer to a tenant protected under that Act, but the term got currency from the marginal note to section 15 of the Rent and Mortgage Interest (Restriction) Act, 1920.
L498: That section which provided inter alia that a tenant who by virtue of that Act retained possession of any dwelling house to which the Act applied, so long as he retained possession, must observe and would be entitled to the benefit of all the terms and conditions of the original contract of tenancy which were consistent with the provisions of the Act, carried the description in the margin 'conditions of statutory tenancy'.
L499: Since then the term has been used in England to describe a tenant protected under the subsequent statutes until Section 49(1) of the Housing Repairs and Rent Act, 1954 for the first time define 'statutory tenant' and 'statutory tenancy'.
L500: 'Statutory Tenant' was defined as a tenant 'who retains possession by virtue of the Rent Acts and not as being entitled to a tenancy' and it was added, 'statutory 18 tenancy' shall be construed accordingly.' This definition of 'statutory tenancy' has been incorporated in the Rent Acts of 1957 and 1965.
L501: In England 'statutory tenancy' does not appear to have had any clear and fixed incidents; the concept was developed over the years from the provisions of the successive Rent Restrictions Act which did not contain a clear indication as to the character of such tenancy. That a statutory tenant is entitled to the benefit of the terms and conditions of the original contract of tenancy so far as they were consistent with the provisions of the statute did not as Scrutton L.J. observed in Roe v.
L502: Russell(1) 'help very much when one came to the practical facts of life', according to him 'citizens are entitled to complain that their legislators did not address their minds to the probable events that might happen in cases of statutory tenancy, and consider how the legal interest they were granting was affected by those probable events'. He added, '........
L503: it is pretty evident that the Legislature never considered as a whole the effect on the statutory tenancy of such ordinary incidents as death, bankruptcy, voluntary assignment, either inter vivos or by will, a total or partial sub-letting; but from time to time put into one of the series of Acts a provision as to one of the incidents without considering how it fitted in with the general nature of the tenancy which those incidents might affect.' On the provisions which gave no clear and comprehensive idea of the nature of statutory tenancy, the courts in England had been slowly 'trying to frame a consistent theory (2)' making bricks with very insufficient statutory straw' (3) Evershed M.R.
L504: in Boyer v. Warbey (4) said: 'The character of the statutory tenancy, I have already said, is a very special one. It has earned many epithets, including 'monstrum horrendum' and perhaps it has never been fully thought out by Parliament'.
L505: Courts in England have held that a statutory tenant has no estate or property in the premises he occupies because he retains possession by virtue of the 19 Rent Acts and not as being entitled to a tenancy; it has been said that he has only a personal right to remain in occupation, the statutory right of 'irremovability', and nothing more.
L506: > We find it difficult to appreciate how in this country we can proceed on the basis that a tenant whose contractual tenancy has determined but who is protected against eviction by the statute, has no right of property but only a personal right to remain in occupation, without ascertaining what his rights are under the statute. The concept of a statutory tenant having no estate or property in the premises which he occupies is derived from the provisions of the English Rent Acts.
L507: But it is not clear how it can be assumed that the position is the same in this country without any reference to the provisions of the relevant statute. Tenancy has its origin in contract. There is no dispute that a contractual tenant has an estate or property in the subject matter of the tenancy, and heritability is an incident of the tenancy.
L508: It cannot be assumed, however, that with the determination of the tenancy the estate must necessarily disappear and the statute can only preserve his status of irremovability and not the estate he had in the premises in his occupation. It is not possible to claim that the 'sanctity' of contract cannot be touched by legislation.
L509: It is therefore necessary to examine the provisions of the cite37†Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 to find out whether the respondents' predecessors-in-interest retained a heritable interest in the disputed premises even after the termination of their tenancy.
L510: > cite38†Section 2(i) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act 1961 defines 'tenant' to mean, unless the context otherwise requires:
L511: > 'a person by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any accommodation is, or, but for a contract express or implied would be payable for any accommodation and includes any person occupying the accommodation as a sub-tenant and also any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy whether before or after the 20 commencement of this Act; but shall not include any person against whom any order or decree for eviction has been made'.
L512: > The definition makes a person continuing in possession after the determination of his tenancy a tenant unless a decree or order for eviction has been made against him, thus putting him on par with a person whose contractual tenancy still subsists. The incidents of such tenancy and a contractual tenancy must therefore be the same unless any provision of the Act conveyed a contrary intention.
L513: That under this Act such a tenant retains an interest in the premises, and not merely a personal right of occupation, will also appear from cite30†section 14 which contains provisions restricting the tenant's power of subletting. cite30†Section 14 is in these terms:
L514: > 'Sec. 14 Restriction on sub-letting.-(1) No tenant shall without the previous consent in writing of the landlord-
L515: 
L516: > (a) sublet the whole or any part of the accommodation held by him as a tenant: or
L517: 
L518: > (b) transfer or assign his rights in the tenancy or in any part thereof.
L519: > (2) No landlord shall claim or receive the payment of any sum as premium or pugree or claim or receive any consideration whatsoever in cash or in kind for giving his consent to the sub-letting of the whole or any part of the accommodation held by the tenant'.
L520: There is nothing to suggest that this section does not apply to all tenants as defined in cite39†Section 2(i) . A contractual tenant has an estate or interest in premises from which he carves out what he gives to the sub-tenant.
L521: cite30†Section 14 read with cite39†section 2 (i) makes it clear that the so called statutory tenant has the right to sub-let in common with a contractual tenant and this is because he 21 also has an interest in the premises occupied by him." It may be noted that in deciding Damadilal's case (supra), this Court considered the two decisions of this Court, namely, the decisions in Anand Nivas and Jagdish Chander Chatterjee's cases (supra) which have been relied on by the learned counsel for the landlords.
L522: The decision of this Court in the case of cite28†Ganpat Ladha v. Sashikant Vishnu Shinde (1) is another decision on which very strong reliance has been placed on behalf of the landlords.
L523: In this case under cite35†Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 , the Court was concerned with the question whether the heirs of deceased tenant whose tenancy has been determined and against whom eviction proceeding was pending, were entitled to the benefit of protection afforded to the tenant after the determination of the tenancy in respect of the business premises. This Court noticed at page 202 that the tenancy right was being claimed under cite27†S.
L524: 5(11) (c) of the said Act which, as recorded in the judgment, is in the following terms :
L525: > "5(11)(c) : `tenant' means any person by whom or on whose account rent is payable for any premises and includes-
L526: 
L527:     	  (a) ...     ...     ...     ...     ...
L528:     	  (b) ...     ...     ...     ...     ...
L529: 
L530: 
L531: > (c) any member of the tenant's family residing with him at the time of his death as may be decided in default of agreement by the Court."
L532: 
L533: While dealing with this question, this Court held at pp. 202-204 :
L534: > "In these circumstances, the question arose for decision whether the present respondent, whose residence is given in the special leave petition as `Agakhan Building, Haines Road, Bombay', could possibly claim to 22 be a tenant in respect of the shop which admittedly constitutes business premises by reason of cite27†Section 5(11) (c) of the Act.
L535: The High Court took the view that cite27†section 5(11) (c) applies not only to residential premises but also to business premises and therefore, on the death of a tenant of business premises, any member of tenant's family residing with him at the time of his death would become a tenant. We do not think this view taken by the High Court is correct. It is difficult to see how in case of business premises, the need for showing residence with the original tenant at the time of his death would be relevant.
L536: It is obvious from the language of cite27†Section 5(11) (c) that the intention of the legislature in giving protection to a member of the family of the tenant residing with him at the time of his death was to secure that on the death of the tenant, the member of his family residing with him at the time of his death is not thrown out and this protection would be necessarily only in case of residential premises.
L537: When a tenant is in occupation of business premises, there would be no question of protecting against dispossession a member of the tenant's family residing with him at the time of death. The tenant may be carrying on a business in which the member of his family residing with him may not have any interest at all and yet on the construction adopted by the High Court, such member of the family would become a tenant in respect of the business premises.
L538: Such a result could not have been intended to be brought about by the legislature. It is difficult to discern any public policy which might seem to require it.
L539: The principle behind cite27†section 5(11) (c) seems to be that when a tenant is in occupation of premises, the tenancy is taken by him not only for his own benefit, but also for the benefit of the members of the family residing with him and, therefore, when the tenant dies, protection should be extended to the members of the family who were participants in the benefit of the tenancy and for whose needs inter alia the tenancy was originally taken by the tenant.
L540: This principle underlying the enactment of cite27†section 5(11) (c) also goes to indicate that it is in respect of residential premises that the protection 23 of that section is intended to be given.
L541: We can appreciate a provision being made in respect of business premises that on the death of a tenant in respect of such premises, any member of the tenant's family carrying on business with the tenant in such premises at the time of his death shall be a tenant and the protection of the cite24†Rent Act shall be available to him.
L542: But we fail to see the purpose the legislature could have had in view in according protection in respect of business premises to a member of the tenant's family residing with him at the time of his death. The basic postulate of the protection under the cite24†Rent Act is that the person who is sought to be protected must be in possession of the premises and his possession is protected by the legislation.
L543: But in case of business premises, a member of the family of the tenant residing with him at the time of his death may not be in possession of the business premises; he may be in service or he may be carrying on any other business. And yet on the view taken by the High Court, he would become tenant in respect of the business premises with which he has no connection.
L544: We are, therefore, in agreement with the view taken by one of us (Bhagwati J.) in the Gujarat High Court about the correct meaning of cite27†Section 5(11) (c) in cite40†Perupai Manilal Brahmin & Ors. v. Baldevdas Zaverbhai Tapodhan (1) in preference to the view adopted in the subsequent decision of the Gujarat High Court in Heirs of deceased cite41†Darji Mohanlal Lavji v. Muktabai Shamji (2) which decision was followed by the Bombay High Court in the judgment impugned in the present appeals before us."
L545: This decision proceeds entirely on the construction of cite27†S.5(11)(c)(i) and it does not appear that the case of Damadilal (supra) which also was in respect of commercial premises was cited before this Court or was considered by the Court while deciding this case. cite27†Section 5(11)(b) and cite27†Section 5(11)(c)(ii) were also not discussed.
L546: 
L547: 24
L548: The aforesaid decisions indicate that there is a divergence of opinion in this Court on the question whether the heirs of a deceased tenant whose contractual tenancy in respect of commercial premises has been determined, can inherit the tenancy rights of the deceased tenant and can claim the benefit and protection to which the deceased tenant was entitled under the Act.
L549: For an appreciation of the question it is necessary to understand the kind of protection that is sought to be afforded to a tenant under the Rent Acts and his status after the termination of the contractual tenancy under the Rent Acts.
L550: It is not in dispute that so long as the contractual tenancy remains subsisting, the contractual tenancy creates Charitable rights; and, on the death of a contractual tenant, the heirs and legal representatives step into the position of the contractual tenant; and, in the same way on the death of a landlord the heirs and legal representatives of a landlord become entitled to all the rights and privileges of the contractual tenancy and also come under all the obligations under the contractual tenancy.
L551: A valid termination of the contractual tenancy puts an end to the contractual relationship. On the determination of the contractual tenancy, the landlord becomes entitled under the law of the land to recover possession of the premises from the tenant in due process of law and the tenant under the general law of the land is hardly in a position to resist eviction, once the contractual tenancy has been duly determined.
L552: Because of scarcity of accommodation and gradual high rise in the rents due to various factors, the landlords were in a position to exploit the situation for unjustified personal gains to the serious detriment of the helpless tenants.
L553: Under the circumstances it became imperative for the legislature to intervene to protect the tenants against harassment and exploitation by avaricious landlords and appropriate legislation came to be passed in all the States and Union Territories where the situation required an interference by the legislature in this regard. It is no doubt true that the Rent Acts are essentially meant for the benefit of the tenants.
L554: It is, however, to be noticed that the Rent Acts at the same time also seek to safeguard legitimate interests of the landlords. The Rent Acts which are indeed in the nature of social welfare legislation are intended to protect tenants against harassment and exploitation by landlords, safeguarding at the same time the legitimate interests of the landlords.
L555: The Rent Acts seek to preserve social harmony and promote social justice by safeguarding 25 the interests of the tenants mainly and at the same time protecting the legitimate interests of the landlords.
L556: Though the purpose of the various Rent Acts appear to be the same, namely, to promote social justice by affording protection to tenants against undue harassment and exploitation by landlords, providing at the same time for adequate safeguards of the legitimate interests of the landlords, the Rent Acts undoubtedly lean more in favour of the tenants for whose benefit the Rent Acts are essentially passed.
L557: It may also be noted that various amendments have been introduced to the various Rent Acts from time to time as and when situation so required for the purpose of mitigating the hardship of tenants.
L558: Keeping in view the main object of Rent Control Legislation, the position, of a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been determined has to be understood in the light of the provisions of the Rent Acts.
L559: Though provisions of all the Rent Control Acts are not uniform, the common feature of all the Rent Control Legislation is that a contractual tenant on the termination of the contractual tenancy is by virtue of the provisions of the Rent Acts not liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary law of the land and he is entitled to remain in possession even after determination of the contractual tenancy and no order or decree for eviction will be passed against a tenant unless any ground which entitles the landlord to get an order or decree for possession specified in the Act is established.
L560: In other words, the common feature of every cite42†Rent Control Act is that it affords protection to every tenant against eviction despite termination of tenancy except on grounds recognised by the Act and no order or decree for eviction shall be passed against the tenant unless any such ground is established to the satisfaction of the Court.
L561: This Court has very aptly observed in Damadilal's case (supra) that it cannot be assumed that with the determination of the tenancy, the estate must necessarily disappear and the statute can only preserve the status of irremovability and not the estate he has in the premises in his occupation; and it is not possible to claim that the sanctity of contract cannot be touched by legislation. As already noticed, this Court in Damadilal's case (supra) after referring mainly to the definition of tenant in cite38†S.
L562: 2(i) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 came to the so-called statutory tenant had an interest in the premises occupied by him and the heirs of the statutory tenant "had a heritable interest in the premises". A 26 tenant has been defined in cite26†S. 2(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, which reads as follows :-
L563: > "`tenant' means any person by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any premises is, or, but for a special contract would be, payable, and includes-
L564: 
L565: > (i) a sub-tenant;
L566: 
L567: > (ii) any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy; and
L568: > (iii) in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy, subject to the order of succession and conditions specified respectively, in Explanation I and Explanation II to this clause, such of the aforesaid person's-
L569: 
L570: > (a) spouse,
L571: 
L572: > (b) son or daughter, or, where there are both son and daughter, both of them,
L573: 
L574: > (c) parents,
L575: > (d) daughter-in-law, being the widow of his predeceased son, as had been ordinarily living in the premises with such person as a member or members of his family upto the date of his death, but does not include, -
L576: 
L577: > (A) any person against whom an order or decree for eviction has been made, except where such decree or order for eviction is liable to be re-opened under the proviso to section 3 of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976.
L578: > (B) any person to whom a licence, as defined by cite43†section 52 of the Indian Easements Act, 1882 has been granted.
L579: 
L580: 27
L581: 
L582: Explanation I.-The order of succession in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy shall be as follows.-
L583: 
L584: (a) firstly, his surviving spouse;
L585: (b) secondly, his son or daughter, or both, if there is no surviving spouse, or if the surviving spouse did not ordinarily live with the deceased person as a member of his family upto the date of his death;
L586: 
L587: (c) thirdly, his parents, if there is no surviving spouse, son or daughter of the deceased person, or if such surviving spouse, son or daughter or any of them, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member of the family of the deceased person upto the date of his death; and
L588: (d) fourthly, his daughter-in-law, being the widow of his pre-deceased son, if there is no surviving spouse, son, daughter or parents of the deceased person, or if such surviving spouse son, daughter or parents, or any of them, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member of the family of the deceased person up to the date of his death.
L589: Explanation II.-If the person, who acquires, by succession, the right to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy, was not financially dependent on the deceased person on the date of his death, such successor shall acquire such right for a limited period of one year; and, on the expiry of that period, or on his death, whichever is earlier, the right of such successor to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy shall become extinguished.
L590: Explanation III.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
L591: (a) where, by reason of Explanation II, the right of any successor to continue in possession after 28 the termination of the tenancy becomes extinguished, such extinguishment shall not affect the right of any other successor of the same category to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy; but if there is no other successor of the same category, the right to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy shall not, on such extinguishment pass on to any other successor, specified in any lower category or categories, as the case may be ;
L592: (b) the right of every successor, referred to in Explanation I, to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy, shall be personal to him and shall not, on the death of such successor, devolve on any of his heirs ;"
L593: > The definition of tenant as it stands at present in the Act, is after the amendment of the definition in cite26†S. 2(1) of the earlier Act, by the Amendment Act (Act 18 of 1976) which was introduced with retrospective effect. Prior to the amendment, the definition of tenant as it stood in the original Act, 1958 was in the following terms :-

