Smt. Gian Devi Anand vs Jeeevan Kumar And Others on 1 May, 1985 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/)
citeturn239view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/","lineno":433}); Total lines: 743
L273:     tenancy but  also  inheriting  the  business  and  they	 are
L274:     entitled to run and enjoy the same. [33 D-G]
L281:     tenants of  commercial premises	 will  cease  to  enjoy	 the
L282:     protection  afforded  to  the  tenant  under  the  Act.	 The
L283:     Legislature could  never have  possible intended  that	with
L284:     death of  a tenant  of the commercial premises, the business
L285:     carried on  by the tenant, however flourishing it may be and
L286:     even if the same constituted the source of livelihood of the
L287:     members of  the family,	 must necessarily  come to an end on
L288:     the death  of the  tenant only because the tenant died after
L289:     the contractual tenancy had been terminated. [35 F-H]
L290:          (3)(iv) In	 case of commercial premises governed by the
L291:     cite23†Delhi Act the Legislature  has not  thought to	 fit in	 the
L292:     light of  the situation	 at  Delhi  to	place  any  kind  of
L293:     restriction on	the ordinary  law of inheritance with regard
L294:     to succession.	It may also be borne in mind that in case of
L295:     commercial premises  the heirs	of the	deceased tenant	 not
L296:     only succeed  to the  tenancy right in the premises but they
L297:     succeed to  the business as a whole. It might have been open
L298:     to the	Legislature  to	 limit	or  restrict  the  right  of
L299:     inheritance with  regard to  the tenancy  as the Legislature
L300:     had done  in the  case of  the tenancies  with regard to the
L301:     residential houses  but it  would not  have been open to the
L302:     Legislature  to	 alter	under  the  cite24†Rent Act ,	the  law  of
L303:     succession  regarding  the  business  which  is	 a  valuable
L304:     heritable right	 and which  must necessarily  devolve on all
L305:     the heirs  in  accordance  with	 law.  The  absence  of	 any
L306:     provision restricting  the heritability	 of the	 tenancy  in
L307:     respect of  the commercial  premises only  establishes	that
L308:     commercial tenancies  notwithstanding the  determination  of
L309:     the contractual	 tenancies will	 devolve  on  the  heirs  in
L310:     accordance with law and the heirs who step into the position
L311:     of the deceased tenant will continue to enjoy the protection
L312:     afforded by  the  act  and  they  can  only  be	 evicted  in
L313:     accordance with the provisions of the Act. [36 B-E]
L314:     5
L315:          (3)(v) As	the protection afforded by the cite24†Rent Act to a
L316:     tenant after  determination of	the tenancy and to his heirs
L317:     on the death of such tenant is a creation of the Act for the
L318:     benefit of  the tenants, it is open to the Legislature which
L319:     provides for  such protection to make appropriate provisions
L320:     in the	Act with  regard to  the nature	 and extent  of	 the
L321:     benefit and protection to be enjoyed and the manner in which
L322:     the same  is to	 be enjoyed.  If the  Legislature makes	 any
L323:     provision in the Act limiting or restricting the benefit and
L324:     the nature  of the  protection to  be enjoyed in a specified
L325:     manner by  any particular  class of  heirs of  the  deceased
L326:     tenant on  any condition  laid	down  being  fulfilled,	 the
L327:     benefit of  the protection  has necessarily to be enjoyed on
L328:     the fulfillment	 of the	 condition in  the manner and to the
L329:     extent stipulated  in the  Act. The Legislature which by the
L330:     cite24†Rent Act seeks to  confer the benefit on the tenants and to
L331:     afford protection  against eviction,  is perfectly competent
L332:     to make	 appropriate  provision	 regulating  the  nature  of
L333:     protection and	the manner  and extent	of enjoyment of such
L334:     tenancy rights	after the termination of contractual tenancy
L335:     of the	tenant	including  the	rights	and  the  nature  of
L336:     protection of the heirs on the death of the tenant. [38 C-F]
L337:          (3) (vi)  When the tenant is a Company or a Corporation
L338:     or any body with juristic personality, question of the death
L339:     of the tenant will not arise. Despite the termination of the
L340:     tenancy, the  Company or  the Corporation  of such  juristic
L341:     personalities, however,	 will go  on enjoying the protection
L342:     afforded to  the tenant	 under the  Act. It  can  hardly  be
L343:     conceived that	the Legislature	 would intend to deny to one
L344:     class of  tenants, namely,  individuals the protection which
L345:     will be	 enjoyed by the other class, namely, the Corporation
L346:     and Companies  and other  bodies with  juristic	 personality
L347:     under the Act. [36 G-H]
L348:          (4) In  the instant  case there  is no provision in the
L349:     Act regulating	the rights  of	the  heirs  to	inherit	 the
L350:     tenancy rights	of the	tenant in  respect of  the  tenanted
L351:     premises which	is commercial  premises, the  tenancy  right
L352:     which is  heritable devolves on the heirs under the ordinary
L353:     law of	succession. The tenancy right of appellant's husband
L354:     therefore, devolves on all the heirs on his death. The heirs
L355:     and legal  representatives of  appellant's husband step into
L356:     his position  and they	are  entitled  to  the	benefit	 and
L357:     protection of  the Act.	 Therefore, the	 High Court  was not
L358:     right  in  coming  to  the  conclusion	that  the  heirs  of
L359:     appellant's husband  the so called statutory tenant, did not
L360:     have any  right to  remain in  possession  of  the  tenanted
L361:     premises and did not enjoy any protection under the Act. The
L362:     judgment and  order of the High Court is therefore set aside
L363:     and the	 case is  remanded to the High Court for decision of
L364:     the appeal  and the cross objection on merits. The appeal is
L365:     accordingly allowed to the extent indicated above. [39 B; D-
L366:     E; G]
L367:          Ganpat Ladha  v. Sashikant Vishnu Shinde [1978] 3 S. C.
L368:     R. 198 dissented.
L369:          The Legislature may consider the advisability of making
L370:     bona fide  requirement of  the landlord a ground of eviction
L371:     in respect of commercial premises as well. [40 F]
L372:     6
L373:     Per Bhagwati, J. (Concurring)
L374:          Though genetically	 the  parentage	 of  the  two  legal
L375:     conceits, namely,  contractual tenancy and statutory tenancy
L376:     is different, one owing its origin to contract and the other
L377:     to rent	 control legislation,  they are	 equated  with	each
L378:     other and  their incidents  are the  same. If  a contractual
L379:     tenant has  an estate  or interest  in the premises which is
L380:     heritable, it  is difficult  to understand  why a  statutory
L381:     tenant should  be held	not to have such heritable estate or
L382:     interest. In  one case, the estate or interest is the result
L383:     of contract while in the other, it is the result of statute.
L384:     But the	 quality of  the estate	 or interest  is the same in
L385:     both cases.  When the  rent  control  legislation  places  a
L386:     statutory tenant  on  the  same	 footing  as  a	 contractual
L387:     tenant, wipes  out  the	 distinction  between  the  two	 and
L388:     invests a  statutory tenant with the same right, obligations
L389:     and incidents  as a  contractual tenant,  why should  it  be
L390:     difficult to  hold that,  just like  a contractual tenant, a
L391:     statutory tenant also has estate or interest in the premises
L392:     which can be inherited. [8 B-F]
L393:          It is  true that  there  are  certain  observations  in
L394:     Ganpat Ladha  v. Sashikant  Vishnu Shinde, [1978] 3 S. C. R.
L395:     198, which  go counter	to what	 the Court is holding in the
L396:     present case  and to  that extent these observations must be
L397:     held not  to enunciate	the correct law on the subject. This
L398:     Court was  not	really	concerned  in  that  case  with	 the
L399:     question or  heritability of  statutory	 tenancy.  The	only
L400:     question was in regard to the true interpretation of cite25†Section 5 (ii) (c) of	the Bombay  Rents, Hotel  and Lodging  House
L401:     Rates Control  Act 1947	 which is  almost in  same terms  as
L402:     cite26†Section 2 (1) (iii) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 and
L403:     while dealing  with this  question, the	 Court made  certain
L404:     observations regarding	the nature  of statutory tenancy and
L405:     its  heritability.  The	 attention  of	the  Court  was	 not
L406:     focussed on  the question  whether a statutory tenant has an
L407:     estate or interest in the premises which is heritable and no
L408:     argument was advanced that a statutory tenancy is heritable.
L409:     It was assumed that a statutory tenancy is not heritable and
L410:     on that	 footing the  case was	argued in regard to the true
L411:     meaning	 and   construction  of	 cite27†Section 5 (ii) (c) .	 The
L412:     observations made  in that  case to the extent to which they
L413:     conflict  with	 the  judgment	in  the	 present  case	must
L414:     therefore be regarded as overruled. [9 A-D]
L415: 
L416: 
L417: 
L418:     JUDGMENT:
L419: CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3441 of 1972.
L420: 
L421: From the Judgment and Order dated 11-10-1979 of the Delhi High Court in S.A.O. No. 8 of 1979.
L422: 
L423: S.N. Andley, Uma Datta, T.C. Sharma and K.S. Mohan for the Appellant.
L424: 
L425: Mrs. Shyamla Pappu, B.B. Sawhney, Mrs. India Sawhney and Miss Kittu Bansilal for the Respondents.
L426: 
L427: 7
L428: The following Judgments were delivered BHAGWATI, J. I entirely agree with the Judgment just delivered by my learned brother A.N. Sen, J. I am adding a few words of my own since I was a party to the decision in cite28†Ganpat Ladha v. Shashikant Vishnu Shinde (1) where certain observations were made which seem to take a different view from the one we are taking in the present case.
L429: The question which arises here for consideration is as to whether statutory tenancy is heritable on the death of the statutory tenant. 'Statutory tenant' is not an expression to be found in any provision of the cite24†Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 or the rent control legislation of any other State.
L430: It is an expression coined by the judges in England and, like many other concepts in English law, it has been imported into the jurisprudence of this country and has become an expression of common use to denote a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been determined but who is continuing in possession of the premises by virtue of the protection against eviction afforded to him by the rent control legislation.
L431: Though the expression 'statutory tenant' has not been used in any rent control legislation the concept of statutory tenant finds recognition in almost every rent control legislation. The definition of 'tenant' in cite26†Section 2(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958-and I am referring here to the provisions of the cite24†Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 because that is the statute with which we are concerned in the present case-includes a statutory tenant.
L432: It says in clause (ii) that 'tenant' includes any person continuing the possession after the termination of his tenancy'. Such a person would not be a tenant under the ordinary law but he is recognised as a 'tenant' by the rent control legislation and is therefore described as a statutory tenant as contra-distinguished from contractual tenant.
L433: The statutory tenant is, by virtue of inclusion in the definition of 'tenant', placed on the same footing as contractual tenant so far as rent control legislation is concerned. The rent control legislation in fact, as pointed out by this Court in a seven judge Bench decision in cite29†V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal (2) does not make any distinction between contractual tenant and statutory tenant.
L434: > "It does not permit the landlord to snap his relationship with the tenant merely by his act 8 of serving a notice to quit on him. Inspite of the notice, the law says that he continues to be a tenant and he does so enjoying all the rights of a lessee and is at the same time deemed to be under all the liabilities such as payment of rent etc. in accordance with the law." The distinction between contractual tenancy and statutory tenancy is thus completely obliterated by the rent control legislation.
L435: Though genetically the percentage of these two legal concepts is different, one owing its origin to contract and the other to rent control legislation, they are equated with each other and their incidents are the same. If a contractual tenant has an estate or interest in the premises which is heritable, it is difficult to understand why a statutory tenant should be held not to have such heritable estate or interest.
L436: In one case, the estate or interest is the result of contract while in the other it is the result of statute. But the quality of the estate or interest is the same in both cases.
L437: The difficulty in recognising that a statutory tenant can have estate or interest in the premises arises from the fact that throughout the last century and the first half of the present, almost until recent times, our thinking has been dominated by two major legal principles, namely, freedom of contract and sanctity of private property and therefore we are unable to readily accept that legal relationships can be created by statute despite want of contractual concensus and in derogation of property rights of the landlord.
L438: We are unfortunately not yet reconciled to the idea that the law is moving forward from contract to status.
L439: Why can estate or interest in property not be created by statute ? When the rent control legislation places a statutory tenant on the same footing as a contractual tenant, wipes out the distinction between the two and invests a statutory tenant with the same right, obligations and incidents as a contractual tenant, why should it be difficult to hold that, just like a contractual tenant, a statutory tenant also has estate or interest in the premises which can be inherited.
L440: Of course, strong reliance was placed on behalf of the landlord on cite26†Section 2(1) (iii) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 to combat this conclusion but that provision merely limits or circumscribes the nature and extent of the protection that should be available on the death of a statutory tenant in respect of residential premises. It does not confer a new right of heritability which did not exist aliunde. My learned brother A.N. Sen, J.
L441: has discussed this aspect of the case in great detail and I find myself wholly in agreement with what he has said in regard to the true meaning and import of cite26†Section 2(1) (iii) .
L442: 9
L443: > Now a word about Ganpat Ladha's case (supra). It is true that there are certain observations cite29†in that case which go counter to what we are holding in the present case and to that extent these observations must be held not to enunciate to correct law on the subject. This Court was not really concerned cite29†in that case with the question of heritability of statutory tenancy.
L444: The only question was in regard to the true interpretation of cite25†Section 5(ii) (c) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act 1947 which is almost in same terms as cite26†Section 2(1) (iii) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 and while dealing with this question, the Court made certain observations regarding the nature of statutory tenancy and its heritability.
L445: The attention of the Court was not focussed on the question whether a statutory tenant has an estate or interest in the premises which is heritable and no argument was advanced that a statutory tenancy is heritable. It was assumed that a statutory tenancy is not heritable and on that footing the case was argued in regard to the true meaning and construction of cite27†Section 5(ii) (c) .
L446: The observations made cite29†in that case to the extent to which they conflict with the judgment in the present case must therefore be regarded as overruled.
L447: > I accordingly concur with the order made by my learned brother A.N. Sen, allowing the appeal and remanding the case to the High Court for disposal according to law. There will be no order as to costs.
L448: > A.N. SEN, J. The question for consideration in this appeal by special leave is whether under the cite14†Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (for the sake of brevity hereinafter referred to as the Act), the statutory tenancy to use the popular phraseology, in respect of commercial premises is heritable or not.
L449: To state is more precisely, the question is whether the heirs of a deceased tenant whose contractual tenancy in respect of commercial premises has been determined, are entitled to the same protection against eviction afforded by the Act to the tenant.
L450: > The question is essentially a question of law. This very question has been raised in a number of appeals, arising out of different sets of facts giving rise, however, to this common question of law in all the appeals. As the decision on this common question of law which arises in the other appeals pending in this Court may effect the parties in the other appeals, we considered it proper to 10 hear the counsel appearing in all the appeals on this common question of law.
L451: We, however, feel that it will be convenient to deal with the other appeals separately and dispose of the same, applying the decision or this common question of law in the light of the facts and circumstances of the other cases and pass appropriate orders and decrees in the other appeals when they are taken up for disposal.
L452: > Though the question is mainly one of law, it is necessary for a proper appreciation of the question involved to set out in brief the facts of the present appeal which is being disposed of by this judgment.
L453: > One Wasti Ram was the tenant in respect of Shop No. 20, New Market, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi under the respondent at the monthly rent of Rs. 110. He came into possession as such tenant on and from 1.9.1959. In April, 1970 the respondent landlord determined the tenancy by serving a notice to quit on the tenant Wasti Ram, since deceased. In September, 1970, the respondent landlord filed a petition under cite30†S.
L454: 14 of the Act for the eviction of the tenant Wasti Ram from the said shop on the following grounds:-(1) non- payment of rent, (2) bona-fide requirement, (3) change of user from residential to commercial, (4) substantial damage to property and (5) sub-letting. In the petition filed by the landlord against the tenant Wasti Ram, the landlord had also impleaded one Ashok Kumar Sethi, as defendant No. 2 alleging him to be the unlawful sub-tenant of the tenant Wasti Ram.
L455: By judgment and order dated 19.5.1975, the Rent Controller held that (1) the ground of bona fide requirement was not available to the landlord under the Act in respect of any commercial premises (2) the premises had been let out for commercial purposes and there had been no change of user, (3) no substantial damage to property had been done by tenant and (4) sub-letting had been established. On the question of non-payment of Rent, the Rent Controller held that the tenant was liable to pay a sum of Rs.
L456: 24 by way of arrears for the period of 1.3.1969 to 28.2.1970 after taking into consideration all payments made and a further sum of Rs. 90 on account of such arrears for the month of September 1970 and the rent subsequent to the month of March, 1975, if not already deposited. In view of the aforesaid finding on the question of default in payment of rent, the Rent Controller held that the tenant was liable to eviction under cite30†S.
L457: 14(1)(a) of the Act and further held that in view of 11 the provisions contained in cite31†S. 15(1) of the Act there would however be no order or decree for eviction if the tenant deposited all the aforesaid arrears within a period of one month from the date of the order and cite29†in that case the ground of non-payment of rent would be wiped out. The Rent Controller ordered accordingly.
L458: > Against the order of the Rent Controller, the landlord preferred an appeal on 13.7.1975 and the tenant Wasti Ram filed his cross-objection. The cross-objection of the tenant was against the order of the Rent Controller regarding his finding on default in payment of rent. The landlord in his appeal had challenged the finding of the Rent Controller on the question of substantial damage to the property by the tenant and also the finding of the Rent Controller on the question of sub-letting.
L459: It appears that during the pendency of the appeal, the tenant Wasti Ram died and on 5.9.1977 the present appellant Smt. Gian Devi Anand, the widow of deceased Wasti Ram, was substituted in place of Wasti Ram on the application of the landlord. The Rent Control Tribunal allowed the cross-objection of the tenant and held that there was no default on the part of the tenant in the matter of payment of rent.
L460: The Rent Control Tribunal rejected the first contention of the landlord in the Landlord's Appeal regarding substantial damage done to the property by the tenant. On the other question, namely, the question of sub- letting, the Rent Control Tribunal allowed the appeal of the landlord and remanded the case to the Rent Controller to decide the question of sub-letting after affording an opportunity to the parties to lead evidence in this regard.
L461: > Against the order of the Rent Control Tribunal, Smt. Gian Devi Anand, the widow of the deceased tenant, filed an appeal in the High Court impleading in the said appeal the other heirs of Wasti Ram as pro-forma respondents. The landlord also filed a cross-objection in the High Court after the widow had presented the appeal against the order of the Rent Control Tribunal directing remand on the question of sub-letting.
L462: In the cross-objection filed by the landlord, the landlord had challenged the finding of the Tribunal on the question of non-payment of rent and had further raised a contention that view of the death of the original tenant Wasti Ram, who continued to remain in possession of the shop as a statutory tenant, the widow and the heirs of the deceased tenant were not entitled to continue to remain in occupation thereof.
L463: The High Court held that on the death of the statutory tenant, the heirs 12 of the statutory tenant had no right to remain in possession of the premises, as statutory tenancy was not heritable and the protection afforded to a statutory tenant by the Act is not available to the heirs and legal representatives of the statutory tenant.
L464: In this view of the matter the High Court did not consider it necessary to go into other questions and the High Court allowed the cross-objection filed by the landlord and passed a decree for eviction against the appellant and the other heirs of Wasti Ram, the deceased tenant.
L465: > The correctness of this view that on the death of a tenant whose tenancy in respect of any commercial premises has been terminated during this life time, whether before the commencement of any eviction proceeding against him or during the pendency of any eviction proceeding against him, the heirs of the deceased tenant do not enjoy the protection afforded by the Act to the tenant and they do not have any right to continue to remain in possession because they do not inherit the tenancy rights of the deceased tenant, is challenged in this appeal.
L466: > The learned counsel for the appellant-tenant argues that there could be no doubt that a contractual tenancy is heritable and he contends that notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy of the tenant in respect of any commercial premises, the position in law remains unchanged in so far as the tenancy in respect of commercial premises is concerned, the virtue of the provisions of the Act.
L467: In support of this contention reference is made to the provisions of the Act and strong reliance is placed on the decision of this court in the case of Damadi Lal & Ors. v. Parashram & Ors.(1) and also to the decision of this Court in the case of cite29†V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal .(2).
L468: > The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the landlord-respondents have submitted that on the determination of the contractual tenancy, the tenancy comes to an end and the tenant ceases to have any estate or interest in the premises.
L469: It is contended that on determination of the tenancy, the tenant becomes liable to be evicted in due process of law under the general law of the land; but, the Act affords a protection to the tenant against such evictiod in as the Act provides that inspite of the termination of 13 the tenancy, no order or decree for procession shall be passed against the tenant, unless any of the grounds mentioned in the Act which entitles a landlord to recover possession of the premises from the tenant is established.
L470: It is contended that the protection to the tenant under the Act is against eviction except on grounds recognised by the Act and the protection is only in the nature of personal protection to the tenant who continues to remain in possession after the termination of the tenancy.
L471: The contention is that the tenant loses the estate or interest in the tenanted premises after termination of the contractual tenancy and the tenant by virtue of the Act is afforded only a personal protection against eviction; and, therefore, the heirs of such tenant on his death acquire no interest or estate in the premises, because the deceased tenant had none, and they can also claim no protection against eviction, as the protection under the Act is personal to the tenant as long as the tenant continues to remain in possession of the premises after the termination of the tenancy.
L472: The argument, in short, is that the protection against eviction after termination of tenancy afforded to a tenant by the Act creates a personal right in favour of the tenant who continues to remain in possession after termination of his tenancy without any estate or interest in the premises; and, therefore, on the death of such a tenant, his heirs who have neither any estate nor interest in the tenanted premises and who do not have any protection under the Act against eviction, are liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary Law of the land.
L473: In support of this argument various authorities including decisions of this Court, of various High Courts, of English Courts and also passages from Halsburys" Laws of England and other eminent English authors have been cited.
L474: > It has been further argued that in view of the clear provision in law that heirs of a deceased tenant whose tenancy had been terminated during his life time and who was continuing in possession by virtue of the provisions of the Act did not enjoy any protection and was liable to be evicted as a matter of course, the Legislature considered it fit to intervene to give some relief to the heirs of the deceased tenant in respect of the residential premises and amended the Act of 1958 by Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Act 18 of 1976) by changing the definition of 'tenant' with retrospective effect.
L475: The argument is that by virtue of the amendment introduced in 1976 with retrospective effect, the heirs of the deceased tenant specified in s. 2 (iii) enjoy the protection against eviction 14 during their life time in the manner mentioned therein, provided the conditions mentioned therein are satisfied, only with regard to residential premises.
L476: It is contended that with regard to the residential premises such limited protection essentially personal to the heirs specified and to be enjoyed by them for their lives in the manner cite29†laid down in the said sub-cite26†section 2 (1) (iii) has been provided by the amendment; but in respect of commercial premises no such protection has been given.
L477: > We do not consider it necessary to refer to the various English cases and the other English authorities cited from the Bar. The English cases and the other authorities turn on the provisions of the English Rent Acts. The provisions of the English Rent Acts are not in pari materia with the provisions of the Act in question or the other Rent Acts prevailing in other States in India.
L478: The English Rent Acts which have come into existence from time to time were no doubt introduced for the benefit of the tenants. It may be noted that the term "statutory tenant" which is not to be found in the Act in question or in the other analogous Rent Acts in force in other States in India, is indeed a creature of the cite16†English Rent Act .
L479: cite16†English Rent Act 1977 which was enacted to consolidate the cite24†Rent Act 1968, parts III, IV and VIII of the Housing Finance Act, 1972, the cite24†Rent Act 1974, sections 7 to 10 of the Housing Rents and Subsidies Act 1975 and certain related enactments, with amendments to give effect to recommendation of the Law Commission, speaks of protected tenants and tenancies in cite32†S.1 and defines statutory tenant in S.
L480: 2, English Rent Act, 1977 is in the nature of a complete Code governing the rights and obligations of the landlord and the tenant and their relationship in respect of tenancies covered by the Act.
L481: As the provisions of the cite16†English Act are materially different from the provisions of the Act in question and other Rent Control Acts in force in other States in India, the decisions of the English Courts and the passages from the various authoritative books including the passages from Halsbury which are all concerned with English Rent Acts are not of any particular assistance in deciding the question involved in this appeal.
L482: As we have already noticed, the term 'statutory tenant' is used in cite16†English Rent Act and though this term is not be found in the Indian Acts, in the Judgments of this Court and also of the various High Courts in India, this term has often been used to denote a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been terminated but who has become entitled to continue to remain in possession by virtue of the protection afforded to him by the statutes in question, 15 namely, the various Rent Control Acts, prevailing in different States of India.
L483: It is also important to note that notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Landlord, the tenant is afforded protection against eviction and is permitted to continue to remain in possession even after the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Act in question and invariably by all the Rent Acts in force in various States so long as an order or decree for evictions against the tenant on any of the grounds specified in such Acts on the basis of which an order or decree for eviction against the tenant can be passed, is not passed.
L484: > As various decisions of this Court on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the Landlord have been cited, it does not become very necessary to consider at any length the various decisions of the High Courts on the very same question, relied on by the Learned Counsel for the landlords.
L485: It may, however, be noted that the decisions of this Court to which we shall refer in due course and the decisions of the High Courts which were cited by the learned counsel for the Landlords do lend support to their contention.
L486: > We first propose to deal with the decision of his Court in Damadilal's case (supra) in which this Court considered some of the English Authorities and also some of the decisions of this Court. In this case the first question raised on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant in this Court was whether the heirs of the statutory tenants had any heritable interest in the demised premises and had the right to prosecute the appeal in the High Court on the death of the statutory tenant.
L487: > Dealing with this contention the Court held at pages 650 to 654:
L488: > "In support of his first contention Mr. Gupta relied on two decisions of this Court, cite33†Anand Nivas (Private) Ltd. v. Anandji Kalyanji Pedhi & Ors (cite34†1) and Jagdish Chander Chatteriee & Ors. v. Sri Kishan & Anr. (2). The statute considered in Anand Nivas(1) case was cite35†Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended in 1959. The question there was, whether a tenant whose tenancy had been terminated had any right 16 to sublet the premises.
L489: Of the three learned Judges composing the Bench that heard the appeal, Hidayatullah and Shah, JJ. held that a statutory tenant, meaning a tenant whose tenancy has determined but who continues in possession, has no power of subletting. Sarkar J. delivered a dissenting opinion. Shah J. who spoke for himself and Hidayatullah J. observed in the course of their judgment:
L490: > 'A statutory tenant has no interest in the premises occupied by him, and he has no estate to assign or transfer. A statutory tenant is, as we have already observed, a person who on determination of his contractual right, is permitted to remain in occupation so long as he observes and performs the conditions of the tenancy and pays the standard rent and permitted increases.
L491: His personal right of occupation is incapable of being transferred or assigned, and he having no interest in the property there is no estate on which subletting may operate.' It appears from the judgment of Shah, J. that 'the cite36†Bombay Act merely grants conditional protection to a statutory tenant and does not invest him with the right to enforce the benefit of any of the terms and conditions the original tenancy'. Sarkar, J.
L492: dissenting held that word 'tenant' as defined in the Act included both a contractual tenant-a tenant whose lease is subsisting as also a statutory tenant and the latter has the same power to sublet as the former. According to Sarkar, J. even if a statutory tenant had no estate or property in the demised premises, the Act had undoubtedly created a right in such a tenant in respect of the property which he could transfer.

