Smt. Gian Devi Anand vs Jeeevan Kumar And Others on 1 May, 1985 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/)
citeturn250view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1887042/","lineno":593}); Total lines: 743
L537: When a tenant is in occupation of business premises, there would be no question of protecting against dispossession a member of the tenant's family residing with him at the time of death. The tenant may be carrying on a business in which the member of his family residing with him may not have any interest at all and yet on the construction adopted by the High Court, such member of the family would become a tenant in respect of the business premises.
L538: Such a result could not have been intended to be brought about by the legislature. It is difficult to discern any public policy which might seem to require it.
L539: The principle behind cite27†section 5(11) (c) seems to be that when a tenant is in occupation of premises, the tenancy is taken by him not only for his own benefit, but also for the benefit of the members of the family residing with him and, therefore, when the tenant dies, protection should be extended to the members of the family who were participants in the benefit of the tenancy and for whose needs inter alia the tenancy was originally taken by the tenant.
L540: This principle underlying the enactment of cite27†section 5(11) (c) also goes to indicate that it is in respect of residential premises that the protection 23 of that section is intended to be given.
L541: We can appreciate a provision being made in respect of business premises that on the death of a tenant in respect of such premises, any member of the tenant's family carrying on business with the tenant in such premises at the time of his death shall be a tenant and the protection of the cite24†Rent Act shall be available to him.
L542: But we fail to see the purpose the legislature could have had in view in according protection in respect of business premises to a member of the tenant's family residing with him at the time of his death. The basic postulate of the protection under the cite24†Rent Act is that the person who is sought to be protected must be in possession of the premises and his possession is protected by the legislation.
L543: But in case of business premises, a member of the family of the tenant residing with him at the time of his death may not be in possession of the business premises; he may be in service or he may be carrying on any other business. And yet on the view taken by the High Court, he would become tenant in respect of the business premises with which he has no connection.
L544: We are, therefore, in agreement with the view taken by one of us (Bhagwati J.) in the Gujarat High Court about the correct meaning of cite27†Section 5(11) (c) in cite40†Perupai Manilal Brahmin & Ors. v. Baldevdas Zaverbhai Tapodhan (1) in preference to the view adopted in the subsequent decision of the Gujarat High Court in Heirs of deceased cite41†Darji Mohanlal Lavji v. Muktabai Shamji (2) which decision was followed by the Bombay High Court in the judgment impugned in the present appeals before us."
L545: This decision proceeds entirely on the construction of cite27†S.5(11)(c)(i) and it does not appear that the case of Damadilal (supra) which also was in respect of commercial premises was cited before this Court or was considered by the Court while deciding this case. cite27†Section 5(11)(b) and cite27†Section 5(11)(c)(ii) were also not discussed.
L546: 
L547: 24
L548: The aforesaid decisions indicate that there is a divergence of opinion in this Court on the question whether the heirs of a deceased tenant whose contractual tenancy in respect of commercial premises has been determined, can inherit the tenancy rights of the deceased tenant and can claim the benefit and protection to which the deceased tenant was entitled under the Act.
L549: For an appreciation of the question it is necessary to understand the kind of protection that is sought to be afforded to a tenant under the Rent Acts and his status after the termination of the contractual tenancy under the Rent Acts.
L550: It is not in dispute that so long as the contractual tenancy remains subsisting, the contractual tenancy creates Charitable rights; and, on the death of a contractual tenant, the heirs and legal representatives step into the position of the contractual tenant; and, in the same way on the death of a landlord the heirs and legal representatives of a landlord become entitled to all the rights and privileges of the contractual tenancy and also come under all the obligations under the contractual tenancy.
L551: A valid termination of the contractual tenancy puts an end to the contractual relationship. On the determination of the contractual tenancy, the landlord becomes entitled under the law of the land to recover possession of the premises from the tenant in due process of law and the tenant under the general law of the land is hardly in a position to resist eviction, once the contractual tenancy has been duly determined.
L552: Because of scarcity of accommodation and gradual high rise in the rents due to various factors, the landlords were in a position to exploit the situation for unjustified personal gains to the serious detriment of the helpless tenants.
L553: Under the circumstances it became imperative for the legislature to intervene to protect the tenants against harassment and exploitation by avaricious landlords and appropriate legislation came to be passed in all the States and Union Territories where the situation required an interference by the legislature in this regard. It is no doubt true that the Rent Acts are essentially meant for the benefit of the tenants.
L554: It is, however, to be noticed that the Rent Acts at the same time also seek to safeguard legitimate interests of the landlords. The Rent Acts which are indeed in the nature of social welfare legislation are intended to protect tenants against harassment and exploitation by landlords, safeguarding at the same time the legitimate interests of the landlords.
L555: The Rent Acts seek to preserve social harmony and promote social justice by safeguarding 25 the interests of the tenants mainly and at the same time protecting the legitimate interests of the landlords.
L556: Though the purpose of the various Rent Acts appear to be the same, namely, to promote social justice by affording protection to tenants against undue harassment and exploitation by landlords, providing at the same time for adequate safeguards of the legitimate interests of the landlords, the Rent Acts undoubtedly lean more in favour of the tenants for whose benefit the Rent Acts are essentially passed.
L557: It may also be noted that various amendments have been introduced to the various Rent Acts from time to time as and when situation so required for the purpose of mitigating the hardship of tenants.
L558: Keeping in view the main object of Rent Control Legislation, the position, of a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been determined has to be understood in the light of the provisions of the Rent Acts.
L559: Though provisions of all the Rent Control Acts are not uniform, the common feature of all the Rent Control Legislation is that a contractual tenant on the termination of the contractual tenancy is by virtue of the provisions of the Rent Acts not liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary law of the land and he is entitled to remain in possession even after determination of the contractual tenancy and no order or decree for eviction will be passed against a tenant unless any ground which entitles the landlord to get an order or decree for possession specified in the Act is established.
L560: In other words, the common feature of every cite42†Rent Control Act is that it affords protection to every tenant against eviction despite termination of tenancy except on grounds recognised by the Act and no order or decree for eviction shall be passed against the tenant unless any such ground is established to the satisfaction of the Court.
L561: This Court has very aptly observed in Damadilal's case (supra) that it cannot be assumed that with the determination of the tenancy, the estate must necessarily disappear and the statute can only preserve the status of irremovability and not the estate he has in the premises in his occupation; and it is not possible to claim that the sanctity of contract cannot be touched by legislation. As already noticed, this Court in Damadilal's case (supra) after referring mainly to the definition of tenant in cite38†S.
L562: 2(i) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 came to the so-called statutory tenant had an interest in the premises occupied by him and the heirs of the statutory tenant "had a heritable interest in the premises". A 26 tenant has been defined in cite26†S. 2(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, which reads as follows :-
L563: > "`tenant' means any person by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any premises is, or, but for a special contract would be, payable, and includes-
L564: 
L565: > (i) a sub-tenant;
L566: 
L567: > (ii) any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy; and
L568: > (iii) in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy, subject to the order of succession and conditions specified respectively, in Explanation I and Explanation II to this clause, such of the aforesaid person's-
L569: 
L570: > (a) spouse,
L571: 
L572: > (b) son or daughter, or, where there are both son and daughter, both of them,
L573: 
L574: > (c) parents,
L575: > (d) daughter-in-law, being the widow of his predeceased son, as had been ordinarily living in the premises with such person as a member or members of his family upto the date of his death, but does not include, -
L576: 
L577: > (A) any person against whom an order or decree for eviction has been made, except where such decree or order for eviction is liable to be re-opened under the proviso to section 3 of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976.
L578: > (B) any person to whom a licence, as defined by cite43†section 52 of the Indian Easements Act, 1882 has been granted.
L579: 
L580: 27
L581: 
L582: Explanation I.-The order of succession in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy shall be as follows.-
L583: 
L584: (a) firstly, his surviving spouse;
L585: (b) secondly, his son or daughter, or both, if there is no surviving spouse, or if the surviving spouse did not ordinarily live with the deceased person as a member of his family upto the date of his death;
L586: 
L587: (c) thirdly, his parents, if there is no surviving spouse, son or daughter of the deceased person, or if such surviving spouse, son or daughter or any of them, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member of the family of the deceased person upto the date of his death; and
L588: (d) fourthly, his daughter-in-law, being the widow of his pre-deceased son, if there is no surviving spouse, son, daughter or parents of the deceased person, or if such surviving spouse son, daughter or parents, or any of them, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member of the family of the deceased person up to the date of his death.
L589: Explanation II.-If the person, who acquires, by succession, the right to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy, was not financially dependent on the deceased person on the date of his death, such successor shall acquire such right for a limited period of one year; and, on the expiry of that period, or on his death, whichever is earlier, the right of such successor to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy shall become extinguished.
L590: Explanation III.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
L591: (a) where, by reason of Explanation II, the right of any successor to continue in possession after 28 the termination of the tenancy becomes extinguished, such extinguishment shall not affect the right of any other successor of the same category to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy; but if there is no other successor of the same category, the right to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy shall not, on such extinguishment pass on to any other successor, specified in any lower category or categories, as the case may be ;
L592: (b) the right of every successor, referred to in Explanation I, to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy, shall be personal to him and shall not, on the death of such successor, devolve on any of his heirs ;"
L593: > The definition of tenant as it stands at present in the Act, is after the amendment of the definition in cite26†S. 2(1) of the earlier Act, by the Amendment Act (Act 18 of 1976) which was introduced with retrospective effect. Prior to the amendment, the definition of tenant as it stood in the original Act, 1958 was in the following terms :-
L594: > "`tenant' means any person by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any premises is, or, but for a special contract would be, payable and includes a subtenant and also any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy but shall not include any person against whom any order or decree for eviction have been made".
L595: It is, therefore, clear from the definition of tenant, whether in the original Act or in the amended Act, that the tenant within the meaning of the definition of the term in the Act includes any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy.
L596: It will be seen that the definition of tenant in cite37†Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 on which the decision in Damadilal's case (supra) mainly turns, is similar to the definition of tenant as given in the cite23†Delhi Act in the sense that the tenant under both the Acts includes for the purpose of the cite24†Rent Act any person continuing in possession after the termination of the tenancy.
L597: 29
L598: The other section of the cite37†M.P. Accommodation Control Act 1961 considered by this Court in deciding Damadilal's case (supra) was cite30†section 14 which deals with sub-letting and this Court held that there was nothing in that section to suggest that the section would not apply to all tenants as defined in cite26†section 2(1) of the said Act.
L599: cite30†S.14 was considered in Damadilal's case (supra) to ascertain whether the `so called statutory tenant' enjoyed the same right as the contractual tenant in the matter of sub-letting and this Court held that the `so called statutory tenant' enjoyed the same right as the contractual tenant.
L600: Let us now analyse the provisions of the cite23†Delhi Act to find out whether there is anything in the other provisions to indicate that the tenant as defined in cite26†S. 2(1)(ii) will stand on any different footing from a contractual tenant in the matter of enjoyment of the protection and benefits sought to be conferred on a tenant by the Act.
L601: cite44†S. 2(e) defines landlord and clearly indicates that the landlord continues to be the landlord for the purpose of the Act even after termination of the contractual tenancy. cite26†S. 2(1) which defines `tenant' has been set out earlier in its entirety. We shall consider the true effect of cite26†S. 2(1)(iii) on which as earlier noted, reliance has been placed by the learned counsel of the landlords, when we deal with the argument which has been advanced on the basis of this subsection.
L602: cite45†Section 3 mentions premises which are outside the purview of this Act and has no bearing on the question involved. cite24†Chapter II of the Act consists of cite46†Sections 4 to cite47†13 and makes provision regarding rent. These sections indicate that they are applicable to tenants as defined in cite26†S. 2(1) including 2(1)(iii). Chapter III consists of cite30†sections 14 to cite48†25 of the Act and deals with eviction and control of eviction of tenants. cite30†S. 14 starts as follows :-
L603: > "notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract, no order or decree for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any Court or Controller in favour of the landlord against a tenant;
L604: 
L605: > .........................
L606: 
L607: > ........................"
L608: 
L609: 30
L610: Thereafter various provisions are made as to grounds and under what circumstances a decree for eviction may be passed. This section, therefore, clearly postulates that despite the termination of the tenancy and notwithstanding the provisions of any other law which might have been applicable on the termination of the contractual tenancy, protection against eviction is applicable to every tenant as defined in cite26†S. 2(1) of the Act.
L611: This section clearly establishes that determination of a contractual tenancy does not disqualify him from continuing to be a tenant within the meaning of this Act and the tenant whose contractual tenancy has been determined enjoys the same position and is entitled to protection against eviction.
L612: The other sections in this chapter also go to indicate that the tenant whose tenancy has been terminated enjoys the same status and benefit as a tenant whose tenancy has not been terminated, and a tenant after termination of his tenancy stands on the same footing as the tenant before such termination.
L613: Chapter III A which provides for summary trial for certain applications also does not make any distinction between a tenant whose tenancy has been determined and a tenant whose tenancy had not been terminated. Chapter IV which deals with deposit of rent consists of cite49†sections 26 to cite50†29 and these sections make it clear that the tenant after determination of a tenancy is treated under the Act on the same footing as a tenant whose tenancy has not been determined.
L614: Chapter V which consists of cite51†sections 30 to cite52†34 deals with hotels and lodging houses and does not have any relevance to the question involved. Chapter VI which consists of cite53†sections 35 to cite54†43 provides for appointment of Controllers and their powers and functions and also makes provisions with regard to appeals.
L615: This chapter though not very material for the purpose of adjudication of the point involved indicates that no discrimination is made in the matter of proceedings for eviction between the `so called statutory tenant' and a contractual tenant. Chapter VII which consists of cite55†sections 44 to cite56†49 makes provisions regarding obligations of landlords and also provides for penalties in appropriate cases.
L616: The sections make it clear that the duties and obligations cast upon the landlord apply equally whether the tenant is a so called `statutory tenant' or the tenant is a contractual tenant. Chapter VIII which makes various miscellaneous provisions does not have any bearing on the question involved.
L617: It may, however, be noted that cite57†section 50 which bars the jurisdiction of Civil Courts in respect of certain matters does not in any way discriminate between a `so called statutory tenant' and a contractual tenant.
L618: The provisions of the Act, therefore, make it abundantly 31 clear that the Act does not make any distinction between a `so called statutory tenant' and a contractual tenant and the Act proceeds to treat both alike and to preserve and protect the status and rights of a tenant after determination of the contractual tenancy in the same way as the status and rights of a contractual tenant are protected and preserved.
L619: While on this question it will be appropriate to quote the following observations of this Court in the case of cite29†V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal (supra) at 340 :-
L620: > "Once the liability to be evicted is incurred by the tenant, he cannot turn round and say that the contractual lease has not been determined. The action of the landlord in instituting a suit for eviction on the ground mentioned in any State Rent Act will be tantamount to an expression of his intention that he does not want the tenant to continue as his lessee and the jural relationship of lessor and lessee will come to an end on the passing of an order or a decree for eviction.
L621: Until then, under the extended definition of the word `tenant' under the various State Rent Acts, the tenant continues to be a tenant even though the contractual tenancy has been determined by giving a valid notice under cite58†section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act. In many cases the distinction between a contractual tenant and a statutory tenant was alluded to for the purpose of elucidating some particular aspects which cropped up in a particular case.
L622: That led to the criticism of that expression in some of the decisions. Without detaining ourselves on this aspect of the matter by any elaborate discussion, in our opinion, it will suffice to say that the various State Rent Control Acts make a serious encroachment in the field of freedom of contract. It does not permit the landlord to snap his relationship with the tenant merely by his Act of serving a notice to quit on him.
L623: Inspite of the notice, the law says that he continues to be a tenant and he does so enjoying all the rights of a lessee and is at the same time deemed to be under all the liabilities such as payment of rent etc. in accordance with the law."
L624: These observations were made by a seven-Judge Bench of this Court. It is not doubt true that these observations were made while 32 considering the question of requirement of a notice under cite58†section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act before the institution of suit for recovery of possession of premises to which the cite24†Rent Act applies.
L625: These observations, however, clearly go to establish that mere determination of the contractual tenancy does not in any way bring about any change in the status of a tenant. As aptly observed in this decision, "it will suffice to say that the various State Rent Control Acts make a serious encroachment in the field of freedom of contract. It does not permit the landlord to snap his relationship with the tenant merely by his act of serving a notice to quit on him.
L626: Inspite of the notice, the law says that he continues to be a tenant and he does so, enjoying all the rights of a lessee and is at the same time deemed to be under all the liabilities such as payment of rent etc. in accordance with the law."
L627: We now proceed to deal with the further argument advanced on behalf of the landlords that the amendment to the definition of `tenant' with retrospective effect introduced by the cite14†Delhi Rent Control Amendment Act (Act 18 of 1976) to give personal protection and personal sight of continuing in possession to the heirs of the deceased statutory tenant in respect of residential premises only and not with regard to the heirs of the `so called statutory tenant' in respect of commercial premises, indicates that the heirs of so called statutory tenants, therefore, do not enjoy any protection under the Act.
L628: This argument proceeds on the basis that in the absence of any specific right created in favour of the `so called statutory tenant' in respect of his tenancy, the heirs of the statutory tenant who do not acquire any interest or estate in the tenanted premises, become liable to be evicted as a matter of course. The very premise on the basis of which the argument is advanced is, in our opinion, unsound.
L629: The termination of the contractual tenancy in view of the definition of tenant in the Act does not bring about any change in the status and legal position of the tenant, unless there are contrary provisions in the Act; and, the tenant notwithstanding the termination of tenancy does enjoy an estate or interest in the tenanted premises.
L630: This interest or estate which the tenant under the Act despite termination of the contractual tenancy continues to enjoy creates a heritable interest in the absence of any provision to the contrary. We have earlier noticed the decision of this Court in Damadilal's case (supra). This view has been taken by this Court in Damadilal's case and in our opinion this decision represents the correct position 33 in law. The observations of this Court in the decision of the Seven Judge Bench in the case of cite29†V.
L631: Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal (supra) which we have earlier quoted appear to conclude the question. The amendment of the definition of tenant by the Act 18 of 1976 introducing particularly 2(1)(iii) does not in any way mitigate against this view.
L632: The said sub-section (iii) with all the three Explanations thereto is not in any way inconsistent with or contrary to subsection (ii) of cite26†Section 2(1) which unequivocally states that tenant includes any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy. In the absence of the provision contained in subsection 2(1)(iii).
L633: the heritable interest of the heirs of the statutory tenant would devolve on all the heirs of the `so called statutory tenant' on his death and the heirs of such tenant would in law step into his position. This sub-section (iii) of cite26†S. 2(1) seeks to restrict this right in so far as the residential premises are concerned.
L634: The heritability of the statutory tenancy which otherwise flows from the Act is restricted in case of residential premises only to the heirs mentioned in S 2(1)(iii) and the heirs therein are entitled to remain in possession and to enjoy the protection under the Act in the manner and to the extent indicated in sub-cite26†section 2(1)(iii) .
L635: The Legislature, which under the cite24†Rent Act affords protection against eviction to tenants whose tenancies have been terminated and who continue to remain in possession and who are generally termed as statutory tenants, is perfectly competent to lay down the manner and extent of the protection and the rights and obligations of such tenants and their heirs. cite26†S.
L636: 2(1)(iii) of the Act does not create any additional or special right in favour of the heirs of the `so called statutory tenant' on his death, but seeks to restrict the right of the heirs of such tenant in respect of residential premises.
L637: As the status and rights of a contractual tenant even after determination of his tenancy when the tenant is at times described as the statutory tenant, are fully protected by the Act and the heirs of such tenants become entitled by virtue of the provisions of the Act to inherit the status and position of the statutory tenant on his death, the Legislature which has created this right has thought it fit in the case of residential premises to limit the rights of the heirs in the manner and to the extent provided in cite26†S.
L638: 2(1)(iii) . It appears that the Legislature has not thought it fit to put any such restrictions with regard to tenants in respect of commercial premises in this Act.
L639: It may be noted that for certain purposes the Legislature in the Delhi Act in question and also in various other Rent Acts has treated 34 commercial premises differently from residential premises cite30†S. 14(1)(d) provides that it will be a good ground for eviction of a tenant from residential premises, if the premises let out for use as residence is not so used for a period of six months immediately before the filing of the application for the recovery of possession of the premises. Similarly cite30†S.
L640: 14(1)(e) makes bonafide requirement of the landlord of the premises let out to the tenant for residential purposes a good ground for eviction of the tenant from such premises. These grounds, however, are not made available in respect of commercial premises.
L641: We find it difficult to agree with the observations which we have quoted earlier made by this Court in the case of cite28†Ganapat Ladha v. Sashi Kant Vishnu Shinde (supra).
L642: It may be noticed that the Legislature itself treats commercial tenancy differently from residential tenancy in the matter of eviction of the tenant in the cite24†Delhi Rent Act and also in various other Rent Acts. All the grounds for eviction of a tenant of residential premises are not made grounds for eviction of a tenant in respect of commercial premises. cite30†S.
L643: 14(1)(d) of the Delhi Rent Act provides that non-user of the residential premises by the tenant for a period of six months immediately before the filing of the application for the recovery of possession of the premises will be a good ground for eviction, though in case of a commercial premises no such provision is made. Similarly, cite30†S.
L644: 14(1)(e) which makes bona fide requirement of the landlord of the premises let out to the tenant for residential purposes a ground for eviction of the tenant, is not made applicable to commercial premises. A tenant of any commercial premises has necessarily to use the premises for business purposes. Business carried on by a tenant of any commercial premises may be and often is, his only occupation and the source of livelihood of the tenant and his family.
L645: Out of the income earned by the tenant from his business in the commercial premises, the tenant maintains himself and his family; and the tenant, if he is residing in a tenanted house, may also be paying his rent out of the said income. Even if tenant is evicted from his residential premises, he may with the earnings out of the business be in a position to arrange for some other accommodation for his residence with his family.
L646: When, however, a tenant is thrown out of the commercial premises, his business which enables him to maintain himself and his family comes to a stand-still. It is common 35 knowledge that it is much more difficult to find suitable business premises than to find suitable premises for residence. It is no secret that for securing commercial accommodation, large sums of money by way of salami, even though not legally payable, may have to be paid and rents of commercial premises are usually very high.
L647: Besides, a business which has been carried on for years at a particular place has its own good will and other distinct advantages. The death of the person who happens to be the tenant of the commercial premises and who was running the business out of the income of which the family used to be maintained, is itself a great loss to the members of the family to whom the death, naturally, comes as a great blow.
L648: Usually, on the death of the person who runs the business and maintains his family out of the income of the business, the other members of the family who suffer the bereavement have necessarily to carry on the business for the maintenance and support of the family. A running business is indeed a very valuable asset and often a great source of comfort to the family as the business keeps the family going.
L649: So long as the contractual tenancy of a tenant who carries on the business continues, there can be no question of the heirs of the deceased tenant not only inheriting the tenancy but also inheriting the business and they are entitled to run and enjoy the same.
L650: We have earlier held that mere termination of the contractual tenancy does not bring about any change in the status of the tenant and the tenant by virtue of the definition of the `tenant' in the Act and the other Rent Acts continues to enjoy the same status and position unless there be any provisions in the Rent Acts which indicate to the contrary.
L651: The mere fact that in the Act no provision has been made with regard to the heirs of tenants in respect of commercial tenancies on the death of the tenant after termination of the tenancy, as has been done in the case of heirs of the tenants of residential premises, does not indicate that the Legislature intended that the heirs of the tenants of commercial premises will cease to enjoy the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act.
L652: The Legislature could never have possibly intended that with the death of a tenant of the commercial premises, the business carried on by the tenant, however flourishing it may be and even if the same constituted the source of livelihood of the members of the family, must necessarily come to an end on the death of the tenant, only because the tenant died after the contractual tenancy had been terminated.
L653: It could never have been the intention of the Legislature that the entire family of a tenant depending upon the 36 business carried on by the tenant will be completely stranded and the business carried on for years in the premises which had been let out to the tenant must stop functioning at the premises which the heirs of the deceased tenant must necessarily vacate, as they are afforded no protection under the Act.
L654: We are of the opinion that in case of commercial premises governed by the cite23†Delhi Act , the Legislature has not thought it fit in the light of the situation at Delhi to place any kind of restriction on the ordinary law of inheritance with regard to succession. It may also be borne in mind that in case of commercial premises the heirs of the deceased tenant not only succeed to the tenancy rights in the premises but they succeed to the business as a whole.
L655: It might have been open to the Legislature to limit or restrict the right of inheritance with regard to the tenancy as the Legislature had done in the case of the tenancies with regard to the residential houses but it would not have been open to the Legislature to alter under the cite24†Rent Act , the Law of Succession regarding the business which is a valuable heritable right and which must necessarily devolve on all the heirs in accordance with law.
L656: The absence of any provision restricting the heritability of the tenancy in respect of the commercial premises only establishes that commercial tenancies notwithstanding the determination of the contractual tenancies will devolve on the heirs in accordance with law and the heirs who step into the position of the deceased tenant will continue to enjoy the protection afforded by the Act and they can only be evicted in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
L657: There is another significant consideration which, in our opinion, lends support to the view that we are taking. Commercial premises are let out not only to individuals but also to Companies, Corporations and other statutory bodies having a juristic personality. In fact, tenancies in respect of commercial premises are usually taken by Companies and Corporations. When the tenant is a Company or a Corporation or anybody with juristic personality, question of the death of the tenant will not arise.
L658: Despite the termination of the tenancy, the Company or the Corporation or such juristic personalities, however, will go on enjoying the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act. It can hardly be conceived that the Legislature would intend to deny to one class of tenants, namely, individuals the protection which will be enjoyed by the other class' namely, the Corporations and Companies and other bodies with juristic personality under the Act.
L659: If it be held that commercial tenancies after the termination of the contractual tenancy of the 37 tenant are not heritable on the death of the tenant and the heirs of the tenant are not entitled to enjoy the protection under the Act, an irreparable mischief which the Legislature could never have intended is likely to be caused.
L660: Any time after the creation of the contractual tenancy, the landlord may determine the contractual tenancy, allowing the tenant to continue to remain in possession of the premises, hoping for an early death of the tenant, so that on the death of a tenant he can immediately proceed to institute the proceeding for recovery and recover possession of the premises as a matter of course, because the heirs would not have any right to remain in occupation and would not enjoy the protection of the Act.
L661: This could never have been intended by the Legislature while framing the Rent Acts for affording protection to the tenant against eviction that the landlord would be entitled to recover possession, even no grounds for eviction as prescribed in the Rent Acts are made out.
L662: In our opinion, the view expressed by this Court in Ganpat Ladha's case and the observations made therein which we have earlier quoted, do not lay down the correct law. The said decision does not properly construe the definition of the `tenant' as given in cite27†S. 5(11)(b) of the Act and does not consider the status of the tenant, as defined in the Act, even after termination of the commercial tenancy.
L663: In our judgment in Damadilal's case this Court has correctly appreciated the status and the legal position of a tenant who continues to remain in possession after termination of the contractual tenancy. We have quoted at length the view of this Court and the reasons in support thereof. The view expressed by a seven-Judge Bench of this Court in cite29†Dhanapal Chettiar 's case and the observations made therein which we have earlier quoted, lend support to the decision of this Court in Dhamadilal's case.
L664: These decisions correctly lay down that the termination of the contractual tenancy by the landlord does not bring about a change in the status of the tenant who continues to remain in possession after the termination of the tenancy by virtue of the provisions of the cite24†Rent Act .
L665: A proper interpretation of the definition of tenant in the light of the provisions made in the Rent Acts makes it clear that the tenant continues to enjoy an estate or interest in the tenanted premises despite the termination of the contractual tenancy.

