Hazari Courts vs M/S Hitkari Brothers Of Delhi (Cycles) on 29 August, 2013 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/172908545/)
citeturn93view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://indiankanoon.org/doc/172908545/","lineno":170}); Total lines: 301
L134: It was further argued that the minute book to prove the resolution authorizing PW-1 to depose for and on behalf of petitioner company was not brought on record and it was also admitted by PW-1 when during his cross examination he stated that he has not brought the minute book today.
L135: It was further argued that PW-1 further admitted that at the time of incorporation of petitioner's company he was not a Director and also does not remember whether there was any change in the Articles of Association or Memorandum of Association of the petitioner's company. Ld. counsel further argued that PW-1 in his further cross examination dated 04.08.2010 also admitted that he has not placed on record any document to show that he and Smt. Sushila Gupta are the Directors of the petitioner company.
L136: It was further argued that the witness also admitted of not having brought the said record with him. Ld. counsel further argued that the incompetency of the witness/PW-1 is also proved through his further cross examination dated 23.05.2011, 30.07.2011 E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 9 of 28 //10// and 15.12.2011 respectively. It was argued that PW-1 was ignorant or was having no knowledge about the status of the tenancy having been created by Sh.
L137: Babu Ram in favour of the respondent. He was also not aware whether the respondent was paying rent to Sh. Babu Ram @ Rs. 58.94/- per month which was subsequently raised to Rs. 95/- per month. Ld. counsel further argued that the witness was also altogether ignorant about the reason for the enhancement in the rate of rent which was giving permission to the respondent/tenant by the erstwhile landlord/owner to do business from the suit property in any name and style. Ld.
L138: counsel further argued that the witness was also not knowing as to at what rate the rent has been taken by the petitioner company from the respondent. Ld. counsel further argued that witness was also not knowing that one Smt. Neelam was a Director of the petitioner company. Ld.
L139: counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, submitted that merely because the witness has no knowledge about the past/previous transaction between the respondent firm and the erstwhile landlords/owners, it cannot be said to be a ground to say that he is not a competent witness. Ld. counsel further argued that PW-1 through his testimony has proved on record the certificate of incorporation of the petitioner company as Ex.
L140: PW-1/1 and the resolution dated 24.10.2007 executed by the Directors of the petitioner company as Ex. PW-1/2. Ld. counsel argued that what more is required of the witness to establish his competency to depose for and on behalf of the petitioner company in the present matter. While so arguing, Ld. counsel for the petitioner relied upon the following citations - (cite17†1) United Bank of India Vs. Naresh Kumar & Ors. , (1996) 6 SCC 660, (2) M/s Allied Motors Vs.
L141: M/s Sanderson Agencies, AIR 1992 Delhi 324 and (3) Ashok Bansal & Ors. Vs. M/s Rajendra Properties (Delhi) Pvt. Ltd.
L142: E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 10 of 28
L143: 
L144: //11// & Ors., Order dated 13.05.2013 in CS (OS) 2576/2010. Ld. counsel argued that these citations are to the effect that minor deficiencies and discrepancies in the testimony of a witness regarding his authorization and competency shall not come in the way of relying upon the otherwise coherent testimony of the witness.
L145: 11. Another contention of the Ld. counsel for the petitioner was that even if it is admitted that M/s Anil & Co. (P) Ltd. and M/s Ankur have the same two partners on board as that of the respondent firm, still there is no escape for the respondents from the provisions of cite9†section 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act. Reference was made to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in cite18†Singer India Ltd. Vs.
L146: Chander Mohan Chadha & Ors. , (2004) 7 SCC 1 wherein while holding that the case of cite19†Madras Bangalore Transport Co. (West) Vs.
L147: Inder Singh , (1986) 3 SCC 62 was decided purely on facts peculiar to it and no principle of law was laid down, it was observed that "there is no ambiguity in the cite9†section 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act and it clearly says that if, without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord the tenant has, on or after 09.06.1952 (i) sub-let, or (ii) assigned, or (iii) otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises, he should be liable for eviction.
L148: The applicability of the section depends upon occurrence of a factual situation, namely, sub-letting or assignment or otherwise parting with possession of the whole or any part of the premises by the tenant. Whether it is a voluntary act of the tenant or otherwise and also the reasons for doing so are wholly irrelevant and can have no bearing". While so observing, reference was made to cite20†Parasram Harnand Rao Vs.
L149: Shanti Prasad Narender Kumar Jain , AIR 1980 SC 1655 wherein it was observed that "language of cite9†section 14(1)(b) is wide enough not only to include any sublease but even an E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 11 of 28 //12// assignment or any other mode by which possession of the tenanted premises is parted with and the provision does not exclude even an involuntary sale. Reference was also made to cite21†Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Limited Vs.
L150: CIT ,AIR 1991 SC 70 wherein it was held that "there can be no doubt that when two companies amalgamate and merge into one, the transferor company loses its identity as it ceases to have its business".
L151: 12. Ld. counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, argued that none of the citations as relied upon by the Ld. counsel for the petitioner are applicable to the facts in hand as in the present case not only the respondent firm M/s Hitkari Brothers is operating from the suit property through its partners, the partners of the said firm alone have incorporated a company M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. which has no separate identity than that of the respondent firm.
L152: It was further argued that in effect both the partners are continuing the business though changed in the course of time with the change in needs and demands, and that there is neither any sub-letting or assignment or parting of possession of the whole or any part of the suit property.
L153: 13. From the rival contentions of the Ld. counsel for the parties, following issues emerge for determination :- (a) Whether the incorporation of M/s Anil & Co. (P) Ltd.
L154: by the partners of the respondent firm is an incident of subletting, assignment or parting with the possession as provided cite9†u/s 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act ; (b) whether the witness/PW-1 Manish Aggawal has failed to prove the authorization regarding his competency to depose and therefore, the case of the petitioner falls on that ground alone ; (c) whether the documents identified and proved by the respondent through the testimony of RW-1 are insufficient so as to make out any similarity between the respondent firm and the company M/s Anil & Co.
L155: Pvt. Limited.
L156: E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 12 of 28
L157: 
L158: //13//
L159: 14. I will first take up the issue concerning the competency of PW-1 to depose for and on behalf of the petitioner company in the present matter. As is to be seen, PW-1 Manish Aggarwal in his testimony by way of affidavit Ex. P-1 deposed that he is a Director of the petitioner company and has been duly authorized vide both the resolutions dated 24.10.2007 to file the present case and to depose.
L160: The copy of the certificate of incorporation of the petitioner company was proved and identified by the witness as Ex. PW-1/1 and one of the resolution dated 24.10.2007 as Ex. PW-1/2. When the said documents were tendered in evidence of PW-1, no objection was raised by the Ld. counsel for the respondent. It was only in his cross examination that the witness was questioned regarding his competency to depose.
L161: It is not in dispute that the petitioner company is the landlord/owner of the suit property which is premises bearing no. 9-B, Netaji Subhash Marg, Daryaganj, New Delhi. Further, there is nothing brought on record or otherwise proved on behalf of the respondent so as to show or establish that PW-1 Manish Aggarwal is not a Director of the petitioner company.
L162: Thus, PW-1 even in the absence of any authorization can depose for and on behalf of the petitioner company which is a private limited company being one of its Directors. Further, merely because the witness was not knowing about the past transactions between the erstwhile landlord and the respondent, it cannot be said that he is not a competent witness as he in his cross examination stated that the petitioner company was purchased by them in the year 2000-01 and it was in 2002 that he and one Smt.
L163: Sushila Gupta were the Directors. Thus, mere non production of the minute book to prove the resolution Ex. PW-1/2 cannot be said to be a ground to disbelieve the entire testimony of the witness. The citation of cite17†United Bank of India and Naresh Kumar (supra) as E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 13 of 28 //14// relied upon by the Ld.
L164: counsel for the petitioner can be referred to wherein it was observed that it will be a travesty of justice, if the appellant is to be non suited for a technical reason which does not go to be root of the matter. The suit did not suffer from any jurisdictional infirmity and the only defect which was alleged on behalf of the respondents was one which was curable. Thus, petitioner's witness PW-1 is held to be competent to depose for and on behalf of the petitioner company.
L165: 15. One of the other issues between the parties is with respect to the assertion made by the respondent in its written statement that initially the respondent was a proprietorship concern of Late Sh. Dina Nath Kapur which was subsequently changed into a partnership firm having its partners as Pran Nath Kapur and Dhian Nath Kapur, the two sons of Late Sh. Dina Nath Kapur. The said subsequent change was also on the basis of the registered last Will of Sh. Dina Nath Kapur executed on 15.05.1965. Ld.
L166: counsel for the petitioner had argued that the bequeathing of the tenancy rights by the original tenant as claimed by the respondent itself non suits the respondent in the present eviction petition. While so arguing, Ld. counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in cite12†Bhavarlal Labhchand Shah Vs. Kanaiya Lal Nathalal Intawala (supra) and of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in cite15†Kenneth Solomon Vs. Dan Singh Bawa (supra). In my considered view, the contention of Ld.
L167: counsel for the petitioner holds no merits as, as per the petitioner itself, respondent/tenant has been shown as a partnership firm of one Kishan Kapur and Dhian Nath Kapur which was into the business of TSR/Taxi meters. When as per the petitioner itself respondent is a partnership firm, any assertion of the respondent in the written statement that initially the tenancy was of the proprietor Dina Nath Kapur makes no difference.
L168: E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 14 of 28
L169: 
L170: //15//
L171: 16. The other two issues which are (a) Whether the incorporation of M/s Anil & Co. (P) Ltd. by the partners of the respondent firm is an incident of subletting, assignment or parting with the possession as provided cite9†u/s 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act and (b) whether the documents identified and proved by the respondent through the testimony of RW-1 are insufficient so as to make out any similarity between the respondent firm and the company M/s Anil & Co. Pvt.
L172: Limited, are taken up together as both these issues are concerning the aspect of subletting/assignment/parting with the possession as provided cite9†u/s 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act. But before that, reference can be made to the relevant provision which is clause (b) to proviso to sub section (1) of cite22†section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
L173: cite9†Section 14(1)(b) lays down that the Controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on the ground that the tenant has, on or before 9th June, 1952, sublet, assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord.
L174: cite9†Section 14 (1) (b) of the Act uses three expressions namely, "subletting", "assigning" and "parting with possession". As has been held by our Hon'ble High Court in cite23†Sohal Lal Vs. Sri Pal and others , 48 (1992) DLT 65 that "these three expressions deal with different concepts and apply to different circumstances.
L175: In subletting, there should exist the relationship of landlord and tenant as between the tenant and his subtenant and the instance of letting of the tenancy must be found namely the transfer of an interest in the estate, demand of rent and the right to possession against the tenant in respect of the premises sublet. In assignment the tenant has to divest himself of all the rights that he has as a tenant. The expression parting with E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs.
L176: M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 15 of 28 //16// possession undoubtedly postulates parting with legal possession. Parting with possession means giving possession to persons other than those to whom possession has been assigned by the lease and the parting with possession must have been by the tenant. The divestment or abandonment of right to possession is necessary in order to invoke the clause of parting with possession".
L177: In M/s cite24†Bharat Sales Ltd. Vs. Life Insurance Corporation of India , AIR 1998 SC 1240, Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with the interpretation of cite9†section 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act observed that "Sub-tenancy or sub-letting comes into existence when the tenant gives up possession of the tenanted accommodation, wholly or in part, and puts another person in exclusive possession thereof.
L178: This arrangement comes about obviously under a mutual agreement or understanding between the tenant and the person to whom the possession is so delivered. In this process, the landlord is kept out of the scene.
L179: Rather, the scene is enacted behind the back of the landlord, concealing the overt acts and transferring possession clandestinely to a person who is an utter stranger to the landlord, in the sense that the landlord had not let out the premises to that person nor had he allowed or consented to his entering into possession over the demised property.
L180: It is the actual, physical and exclusive possession of that person, instead of the tenant, which ultimately reveals to the landlord that the tenant to whom the property was let out has put some other person into possession of that property. In such a situation, it would be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct evidence, the contract or agreement or understanding between the tenant and the sub- tenant.
L181: It would also be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct evidence, that the person to whom the property had been sub-let had paid monetary E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 16 of 28 //17// consideration to the tenant. Payment of rent, undoubtedly, is an essential element of lease or sub-lease. It may be paid in cash or in kind or may have been paid or promised to be paid.
L182: It may have been paid in lump sum in advance covering the period for which the premises is let out or sub-let or it may have been paid or promised to be paid periodically.
L183: Since payment of rent or monetary consideration may have been made secretly, the law does not require such payment to be proved by affirmative evidence and the court is permitted to draw its own inference upon the facts of the case proved at the trial, including the delivery of exclusive possession to infer that the premises were sub-let".
L184: Finally, Hon'ble Supreme Court in cite11†Celina Coelho 's case (supra) summarize the legal position with respect to the eviction on the grounds of sub-letting in the following :-
L185: > (i) In order to prove mischief of sub-letting as a ground for eviction under Rent Control Laws, two ingredients have to be establish, (one) parting with possession of tenancy or part of it by the tenant in favour of a third party with exclusive right of possession, and (two) that such parting with possession has been done without the consent of the landlord and in lieu of compensation or rent.
L186: > (ii) Inducting a partner or partners in the business or profession by a tenant by itself does not amount to sub-letting. However, if the purpose of such partnership is ostensible and a deed of partnership is drawn to conceal the real transaction of sub-
L187: 
L188: letting, the court may tear the veil of partnership to find out the real nature of transaction entered into by the tenant.
L189: 
L190: E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 17 of 28
L191: 
L192: //18//
L193: (iii) The existence of deed of partnership between the tenant and alleged sub-tenant or ostensible transaction in any other form would not preclude the landlord from bringing on record material and circumstances, by adducing evidence or by means of cross examination, making out a case of sub-letting or parting with possession in tenancy premises by the tenant in favour of a third person.
L194: (iv) If the tenant is actively associated with the partnership business and retains the control over the tenancy premises with him, may be alongwith partners, tenant may not be said to have parted with possession.
L195: (v) Initial burden of proving sub-letting is on the landlord but once he is able to establish that a third party is in exclusive possession of the premises and that tenant has no legal possession of the tenanted premises, the onus shifts to the tenant to prove the nature of occupation of such third party and that he (tenant) continues to hold legal possession in tenancy premises.
L196: (vi) In other words, initial burden lying on the landlord would stand discharged by adducing prima facie proof of the fact that a party other than the tenant was in exclusive possession of the premises. A presumption of sub-letting may then be raised and would amount to proof unless rebutted.
L197: 17. Applying the principles as aforesaid to the facts in hand, it is to be seen that petitioner in order to establish that a third party which as alleged by the petitioner is M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Ankur Wears is in exclusive possession of the suit property and that the respondent/tenant firm has no E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 18 of 28 //19// legal possession of the suit property, examined one of its Directors Manish Aggarwal as PW-1.
L198: With respect to the constitution of the respondent/tenant firm M/s Hitkari Brothers of Delhi (cycles), PW-1 in his examination in chief by way of affidavit Ex. P-1 stated in para no. (v) that at the time of letting out of the premises, respondent was partnership firm consisting of its partners namely Sh. Kishan Nath Kapur and Sh. Dhian Nath Kapur and the said firm was formed to run the business of TSR/Taxi meters.
L199: When the witness was asked in his cross examination as to whether he knows about Kishan Kapur or has any proof of the respondent partnership firm, he replied by stating that he does not know any Kishan Kapur and also does not have any proof of the partnership of the respondent firm. He further stated that he does not personally know Sh. Kishan Kapur and also has no documentary proof to show that Kishan Nath and Dhian Nath Kapur are the partners of respondent firm.
L200: While so stating, PW-1 volunteered that they were orally told by the person who transferred the company in their name. From the said testimony of PW-1, it gets established that petitioner is not even knowing the constitution of the respondent firm. Now, what is the constitution of the respondent firm is to be gathered from the evidence brought on record by the respondent side. Respondent, as already noted, in order to prove its case examined one of its partners Sh.
L201: Dhian Nath Kapur as RW-1 by way of affidavit Ex. RW-1/A. While stating in his evidence by way of affidavit that the present constitution of the respondent firm is of two partners, one himself and the other his wife Mrs. Anil Kapur, RW-1 also placed on record Ex. DW-1/1 which is the record of the respondent firm as available with the Registrar of Firms.
L202: Perusal thereof established on record that whereas initially Pran Nath Kapur and Dhian Nath Kapur were the partners of respondent firm from 20.03.1978, one the partners E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 19 of 28 //20// Pran Nath retired and in his place wife of the another partner Mrs. Anil Kapur joined the firm w.e.f 09.05.2006. Besides this, RW-1 also proved the partnership deeds, one between him and his brother Pran Nath Kapur as Ex.
L203: DW-1/2 and the other between him and his wife as Ex. DW-1/3. The relinquishment deed executed by the retiring partner Pran Nath Kapur was also brought on record by the witness and identified as Ex. DW1-A/4. Even in his cross examination RW-1 reiterated that he and his brother Pran Nath joined the business w.e.f 20.03.1978, the date when their father Dina Nath Kapur expired. He also reiterated that the partnership deed was entered between himself and his brother and was also registered.
L204: This establishes on record that the constitution of the respondent/tenant firm as on or before the date of the filing of the present eviction petition was of two partners namely RW-1 Dhian Nath Kapur and his wife Mrs. Anil Kapur. Now, the onus was upon the petitioner to establish that instead of the respondent/tenant Hitkari Brothers, some third party is in possession of the suit property and this possession is to the exclusion of the respondent/tenant. PW-1 in para no. 7 of his affidavit in evidence Ex.
L205: P-1 stated that the suit property/shop is under the control and possession of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd., a company incorporated under the cite25†Companies Act, 1956 which is running its business under the brand name of M/s Ankur of jewellery and readymade garments. In para no. 9 of Ex. P-1, PW-1 stated that it has been wrongly alleged that partners of respondent firm and directors of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. are the same. The only document relied upon by PW-1 to show that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
L206: is in possession of the suit property is Ex. PW-1/4 which is a payment receipt dated 25.07.2005 which is on the letter head of M/s Ankur, a unit of Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. operating from the suit property. It is also having a visiting card of E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 20 of 28 //21// M/s Ankur Hi-Fashion Ladies Salwar Suits with name of Mrs. A.Kapur shown therein and the address of its works shown as that of the suit property.
L207: In support of the said document, PW-1 in his cross examination dated 04.08.2010 stated that Ex. PW-1/4 was issued to his wife as she purchased two suits against the said bill. He further stated that he was also accompanying his wife when the articles were purchased vide Ex. PW-1/4. Thus, no other document was brought on record or otherwise proved on record by the petitioner so as to establish that the respondent firm is different from the company M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Limited.
L208: Reference herein can also be made to the further cross examination of PW-1 which is dated 15.12.2011. In the said cross examination, to a specific question put to the witness as to what he knows about Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd., PW-1 replied by stating that the Directors in the said company are different then the respondent. To an another question as to what he knows of the Directors of Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd., PW-1 stated that he does not personally know the Directors of the said company and had never met them.
L209: When the witness was questioned with respect to the details of the partners of the respondent firm, he replied that he does not know that the sons of Dina Nath Kapur namely Pran Nath Kapur and Dhian Nath Kapur became the partners of Hitkari Brothers. He further showed his ignorance about the retirement of Pran Nath Kapur and after his retirement, wife of Dhian Nath Kapur becoming a partner of the respondent firm. However, PW-1 stated that Mrs. Anil Kapur is a Director of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
L210: and does not know whether Dhian Nath Kapur is also a Director. PW-1 further stated that the possession of the suit premises is only with Mrs. Anil Kapur and not with her husband Dhian Nath Kapur. He further stated that he came to know that Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. is running its business from the suit E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 21 of 28 //22// premises since 1998.
L211: Thus, from the testimony of PW-1 who is the only witness examined by the petitioner to substantiate its case, it is apparent that the said witness has no knowledge as to whether the partners of the respondent firm are not the Directors of the alleged sub-tenant M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Limited.
L212: As has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in cite11†Celina Coelho 's case that it is for the landlord to prove either by adducing evidence by bringing on record material and circumstances or by means of cross examination that the relationship between the tenant and the alleged sub- tenant is such that it makes out a case of sub-letting cite9†u/s 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act.
L213: As already noted, neither any document nor any material was brought in evidence by the petitioner company so as to establish that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. or its unit M/s Ankur is a sub-tenant of the respondent firm. Now, it is the cross examination of RW-1 which becomes relevant. In his cross examination dated 27.07.2012, RW-1 stated that the respondent firm is still running its business and is registered with the Income Tax and Sales Tax. With respect to the certificate Ex.
L214: DW-1/4 and DW-1/12 issued by the Manager of the concerned Banks, RW-1 denied the suggestions that they are forged and fabricated documents. He further stated and rather reiterated that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. has only two Directors, himself and his wife Mrs. Anil Kapur. He admitted that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. is running the business from the shop in question in the name of Ankur Hi-Fashion Ladies Suits. In his further cross examination dated 22.12.2012 RW-1 again reiterated that he and his wife Mrs.
L215: Anil Kapur are running the business from the shop in question and that the respondent at present is doing the business of garments in the name of Ankur and other different names. He further admitted that he and his wife besides other employees are drawing salaries from M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. While so E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 22 of 28 //23// admitting, RW-1 stated that employees of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. are the same employees of the respondent firm.
L216: He denied the suggestions that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. in a secret way is paying rent to the respondent firm or that the constituents of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. are different and independent than that of the respondent. Thus, from the cross examination of RW-1 it is apparent that petitioner has failed to extract anything contrary or anything substantive to the effect that M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. is a third party other than the tenant/respondent and is in exclusive possession of the suit property.
L217: Respondent, on the other hand, to substantiate its case relied upon two documents Ex. DW-1/4 and DW-1/12. Ex. DW-1/4 is a certificate issued by State Bank of India, Ajmal Khan Road Branch which certifies that on the request of the Directors it is informed that Sh. Dhian Nath Kapur and Mrs. Anil Kapur are the Directors of M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Ltd. since 1997. Ex. DW-1/12 is the certificate issued by Central Bank of India, Daryaganj Branch certifying that M/s Ankur Wears, a unit of Hitkari Bros.
L218: Of Delhi (cycles), 9-B, Netaji Subhash Marg, New Delhi is having current account with the bank since 19.05.2006 with the partners Mrs. Anil Kapur w/o Dhian Nath Kapur and Dhian Nath Kapur s/o Deena Nath Kapur.
L219: Merely because, an objection was raised by the petitioner at the time of proof of the said documents and that a suggestion was given to RW-1 regarding the said two documents being forged and fabricated documents, it cannot be said that the petitioner/landlord has discharged the initial burden of proving that it is not the respondent but a third party which is in possession of the suit property. The judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in cite18†Singer India Ltd. Vs.
L220: Chander Mohan Chadha & Ors. (supra) as relied upon by the Ld. counsel for the petitioner is distinguishable to the extent that in the said case, the effect of parting of E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 23 of 28 //24// possession of the tenanted premises as a result of sanction of the scheme of amalgamation of companies was under consideration. However, it was also held therein that there is no ambiguity in cite26†section 14(1) proviso (b).
L221: The applicability thereof depends upon occurrence of a factual situation, namely, sub-letting or assignment or otherwise parting with possession of the whole or any part of the premises by the tenant. Whether it is a voluntary act of the tenant or otherwise and also the reasons for doing so are wholly irrelevant and can have no bearing.
L222: In the said case, a shop in New Delhi was let out to an American company under a registered lease deed and subsequently an eviction petition cite9†u/s 14(1)(b) of the DRC Act was preferred by the landlord claiming that the American company had without its written consent parted with the possession of the said premises in favour of another company, a Indian company.
L223: The plea taken up by the said Indian company that it was on the directions of the RBI issued to the American company and subsequent thereto on the orders of Bombay High Court that the American company was amalgamated with the Indian company was rejected by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and as already noted herein above it was held that whether it is a voluntary act of the tenant or otherwise and also the reasons for doing so are wholly irrelevant and can have no bearing.
L224: Accordingly, the eviction order was passed against the respondent/tenant on the grounds of sub-letting. In the present case, as already noted, petitioner has not been able to prove that the constituents of the respondent firm are different from that of the alleged sub-tenant M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Limited. Instead, respondent has proved on record that the two partners of the respondent firm are also the only two Directors of the alleged sub-tenant M/s Anil & Co. Pvt. Limited.
L225: Reference herein can be made to the judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Mrs. E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Hitkari Brothers Page 24 of 28 //25// cite27†Prem Lata Bhatia Vs. Union of India & Ors. , 128 (2006) DLT 24 wherein while making a reference to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in cite18†Singer India Limited case as aforesaid, it was held that "It is no doubt, true that a company is a distinct legal entity separate from its shareholders.
L226: However, the principle of piercing the veil of corporate personality is now a well settled principle of company law and is applicable to the present case". The facts before the Hon'ble High Court were that the petitioner Mrs. Prem Lata Bhatia was allotted in perpetuity shop no. 10 at K.G.Marg by Union of India at a monthly rent of Rs.
L227: 901/- and one of the clauses of the license deed was that the petitioner/tenant shall not permit the said premises or any part thereof being used by any other person for any purpose whatsoever without the previous consent in writing. The petitioner incorporated a company wherein she alongwith her husband was holding more than 97.93% shares in the company.
L228: Applying the principle as aforesaid to the facts before it, Hon'ble High Court observed that "In our opinion if an individual takes a premises on rent and then converts his sole proprietorship concern into a private limited company in which he has controlling interest he cannot be evicted from the premises, as the same person remains in possession though technically the company now runs the business". Reference herein can also be made to the judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in cite28†Vishwa Nath & Anr.
L229: Vs. Chaman Lal Khanna & Ors., SAO No. 128 of 1974 decided on 19.03.1975. In the said case, it was observed that "if an individual takes the premises on rent and then converts his sole proprietorship concern into a Pvt. Ltd. Company in which he has the controlling interest he cannot be evicted from the premises. On the proved facts this is the inevitable conclusion. The person who took the possession on rent remains in possession though E-599/09/08 M/s Supreme Properties Pvt. Ltd. Vs.

